                                           NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT


                                                                                          MARCO AMELIO


                                                    Abstract. We construct here the first known examples of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups
                                                    of bounded exponent in odd positive characteristic for every large enough prime p ≡ 3 (mod 4).
                                                    In fact, we show that there are countably many pairwise non-isomorphic countable non-split
arXiv:2509.11958v2 [math.GR] 16 Sep 2025




                                                    sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic p for each such p. Furthermore, we construct non-
                                                    periodic non-split sharply 2-transitive groups (of these same characteristics) with centralizers
                                                    of involutions of bounded exponent. As a consequence of these results, we answer two open
                                                    questions about sharply 2-transitive and 2-transitive permutation groups. The constructions of
                                                    groups as announced rely on iteratively applying (geometric) small cancellation methods in the
                                                    presence of involutions. To that end, we develop a method to control some small cancellation
                                                    parameters in the presence of even-order torsion.




                                                                                         1. Introduction
                                               Let n ≥ 1 be an integer and let G be a group acting on a set X with at least n elements.
                                           The action is said to be n-transitive if for any two n-tuples of distinct elements (x1 , . . . , xn ) and
                                           (y1 , . . . , yn ) of X n there exists an element g ∈ G such that g · xi = yi for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Similarly, the
                                           action is said to be n-sharp if for any two such n-tuples there is at most one element g ∈ G with the
                                           aforementioned property. Finally, the action is said to be sharply n-transitive if it is n-transitive
                                           and n-sharp. A group G is called sharply n-transitive if there is a set X with at least n elements
                                           on which G acts sharply n-transitively.
                                               Clearly, every group acts sharply 1-transitively (that is, regularly) on itself by left multiplication.
                                           On the other hand, for n ≥ 4, there are only finitely many sharply n-transitive groups. Moreover,
                                           these groups are necessarily finite and they are completely classified. In fact, Jordan proved in
                                           [Jor72] that the only finite sharply n-transitive groups for n ≥ 4 are the symmetric groups Sn and
                                           Sn+1 , the alternating group An+2 , and the Mathieu groups M11 and M12 for the cases n = 4 and
                                           n = 5 respectively. Furthermore, in [Tit52, Chapitre IV, Théorème I], Tits proved that there are
                                           no infinite sharply n-transitive groups for n ≥ 4. Zassenhaus gave a complete classification of the
                                           finite sharply n-transitive groups for the cases n = 2 and n = 3 in [Zas35a] and [Zas35b]. For
                                           n = 2 and n = 3, there do exist also infinite sharply n-transitive groups: for a skew-field K, the
                                           affine group AGL(1, K) ∼       = K+ ⋊ K ∗ acts sharply 2-transitively on K, and for any (commutative)
                                           field K, the projective linear group P GL(2, K) acts sharply 3-transitively on the projective line.
                                           These groups are infinite whenever K is infinite.
                                               An important feature associated with a sharply 2-transitive group action is its characteristic,
                                           which we define as follows. Let G ↷ X be a sharply 2-transitive group action. It is easy to see
                                           that G has involutions (that is, elements of order 2), and that involutions form a unique conjugacy
                                           class. Moreover, either no involution has fixed points or very involution has exactly one. In this
                                           last case, there is a G-equivariant bijection between the set X and the set of involutions of G
                                           (where we consider on this set the action of G by conjugation), and therefore the translations
                                           (that is, products of two distinct involutions) form a conjugacy class. In this case, we define the
                                           characteristic of G ↷ X to be the order of a translation if this order is finite (in which case it

                                             Date: September 17, 2025.
                                             The author was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy
                                           EXC 2044–390685587, Mathematics Münster: Dynamics–Geometry–Structure and by CRC 1442 Geometry: Defor-
                                           mations and Rigidity.
                                                                                                   1
2                                          MARCO AMELIO


is necessarily a prime number ≥ 3), or as 0 in case this order is infinite. If involutions have no
fixed points, we say that the action G ↷ X has characteristic 2. We will thus talk throughout this
article of a sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p > 2 without specifying the set on which
the group acts, as it should be understood to be the set of involutions of the group.
    Until recently, it was not known whether a sharply 2-transitive group G necessarily splits in the
form A ⋊ H for some non-trivial normal abelian subgroup A (in which case we simply say that G
is split). The first examples of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups were exhibited by Rips, Segev
and Tent in [RST17] in characteristic 2 and by Rips and Tent in [RT19] in characteristic 0. Then,
the first examples of infinite simple sharply 2-transitive groups were constructed by André and Tent
in [AT23] and by André and Guirardel in [AG22] (with additional properties, in particular, finite
generation), all of them in characteristic 0. Later, in [AAT23], the author together with André
and Tent constructed the first examples of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups in characteristic
p > 3. In fact, we proved that, for every large enough prime number p, there exist 2ℵ0 -many
pairwise non-isomorphic non-split sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic p. Notice that, by
a well-known result due to Kerby (see [Ker74, Theorem 9.5]), every sharply 2-transitive group in
characteristic 3 splits. Furthermore, the methods of [AAT23] necessarily yield a very large value
of such p. Thus, the problem of the existence of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups of ‘small’
characteristic p ≥ 5 remains, to the best of our knowledge, open.
    Let us notice that all of the examples previously mentioned contain elements of infinite order
(in fact, by definition in characteristic 0 this will always be the case). Furthermore, all of these
groups have infinite order elements fixing a point. Again, in characteristic 0, this will always be
the case: the centralizer of an involution in one such group will contain a subgroup isomorphic to
Q∗ , the multiplicative group of the field of rational numbers.
    Throughout the years, a number of results have been proved that relate bounded exponent to
splitting of sharply 2-transitive groups. Zassenhaus gave a complete classification of finite sharply
2-transitive groups in [Zas35a] and [Zas35b], proving in particular that all of them split. Later,
Suchkov proved in [Suc01] proved that if the stabilizer of a point in a sharply 2-transitive group is
a 2-group, then the group is finite (and thus split). In addition, Mayr proved in [May06] the same
result for the case in which the stabilizer of a point has exponent 3 or 6. This was generalized
by Jabara in [Jab18] to the case where the point-stabilizers are nilpotent of order 2n 3 for some
positive integer n. In fact, the following question is raised in [May06].
Question 1. Is a sharply 2-transitive group with point-stabilizers of bounded exponent necessarily
finite?
   Within the more general realm of 2-transitive permutation groups, Mazurov proved in [Maz90]
that every 2-transitive permutation group with an abelian stabilizer of a point is isomorphic to
the affine group of a field K. In particular, no such group with an infinite cyclic stabilizer of
a point exists. Notice that, by considering affine groups AGL(1, K) over fields K of positive
characteristic, we can obtain infinite periodic 2-transitive permutation groups (in fact, countable
sharply 2-transitive such groups), as well as (sharply) 2-transitive permutation groups with infinite
order elements centralizing involutions, and such that every element not centralizing an involution
has order bounded by an integer n. The following question by Sysak, appearing in the Kourovka
Notebook as Problem 10.64, asks whether it is possible to have the converse situation.
Question 2. [KM14, Problem 10.64] Does there exist a non-periodic doubly transitive permuta-
tion group with a periodic stabilizer of a point?
   As a consequence of our main results, we will provide answers to both of these questions (see
the details below).
   The main result of this article is the following theorem, stating the existence of non-split sharply
2-transitive groups of bounded exponent for every large enough odd characteristic p with p ≡ 3
(mod 4).
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                              3


Theorem 1.1. There exists an odd number q ′ with the following property: let p ≥ q ′ be a prime
number such that p ≡ 3 (mod 4), and let q1 , q2 ≥ q ′ be a pair of odd numbers. Then, there exists a
countable non-split sharply 2-transitive group G of characteristic p and exponent lcm(q1 , q2 , p, p−1).
Moreover, there exist elements g and g ′ in G such that neither of them is a translation, g centralizes
no involution and is of order q1 , and g ′ is of order q2 and centralizes an involution.
   In addition, for every element g of G, either g is contained in a subgroup of G that embeds into
AGL(1, Fp ) or g falls into one of the following cases.
    (1) The element g centralizes no involution and is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to Cq1 .
    (2) The element g centralizes an involution and is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to C2q2 .
   This provides, in particular, a negative answer to Question 1.
   As noted by Olshanskii in private communication with Hull and Osin (see [HO16, Section 6]), if
a group G of exponent n acts faithfully and k-transitively on a set X, then all integers m ≤ k must
divide n: indeed, the stabilizer of a subset of X of size k maps surjectively onto the symmetric
group Sk . In particular, no group of odd exponent admits a faithful 2-transitive action. Theorem
1.1 shows that this is not the case for groups of even exponent. Let us remark that the groups
constructed in this article are not finitely generated. Thus, the question of the existence of a
Burnside group admitting a faithful 2-transitive action (as raised in [HO16]) remains, to the best
of our knowledge, an open problem.
   Notice also that Theorem 1.1 can be phrased in terms of near-fields and near-domains: it shows,
for instance, that there exist (infinite) near-domains that are not near-fields with bounded exponent
multiplicative group (see, for example, [Ten16] for an explanation on how this interpretation arises).
   As an immediate consequence of Theorem 1.1, we obtain the following corollary (just by con-
sidering all possible distinct prime values of q1 = q2 ).
Corollary 1.2. There exists a prime number q ′ with the following property: let p ≥ p′ be a prime
number such that p ≡ 3 (mod 4). There exist infinitely many countable pairwise non-isomorphic
non-split sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic p of bounded exponent.
   Furthermore, we will derive from Theorem 1.1, using a model-theoretic compactness argument,
the following result.
Theorem 1.3. There exists an odd number q ′ with the following property: let p ≥ q ′ be a prime
number such that p ≡ 3 (mod 4) and q2 ≥ q ′ an odd number. There exists a non-periodic non-
split sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p such that the centralizer of every involution is of
exponent bounded by lcm(q2 , p, p − 1) and it contains an element of order q2 .
   This provides, in particular, a positive answer to Question 2.
   Let us remark now a few facts about the construction of groups as in Theorem 1.1. The main
difficulty in constructing non-split sharply 2-transitive groups in characteristic p > 3 comes from
the fact that the methods used so far in order to construct non-split sharply 2-transitive groups
have proceeded through HNN-extensions, which create translations of infinite order. Therefore,
since in a sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p > 2 all translations have order p, to obtain
sharply 2-transitive groups in characteristic p, it is necessary to add new relations of the form
(rs)p = 1 for distinct involutions r, s. This was achieved in [AAT23] by taking small cancellation
quotients similar to the quotients used in the solution of the famous Burnside problem about the
existence of infinite finitely generated groups of finite exponent (posed by Burnside in [Bur02]),
in order to guarantee that any translation has order p. In this article, we will further adapt the
construction of [AAT23], to be able to impose torsion on every element of infinite order, not just
on the set of translations. It is a well-known fact that small cancellation gets considerably more
complicated in the presence of even torsion. To illustrate this, let us mention that the original
solution to the Burnside problem by Adian and Novikov in [NA69] was produced in 1968, when
they proved that every free Burnside group of odd exponent (in at least two generators) is infinite
provided the exponent is sufficiently large. Meanwhile, the analogue result for the even exponent
4                                          MARCO AMELIO


case was proved only decades later, independently by Ivanov in 1994 (see [Iva94]) and by Lysenok in
1996 (see [Lys96]). All of these results are proved using some form of iterated small cancellation,
and the difficulties in the presence of even torsion come, among others, from the fact that the
algebraic structure of finite subgroups of free Burnside groups is more intricate in this case: every
finite subgroup of a free Burnside group of odd order is cyclic, while infinite Burnside groups of
even exponent contain arbitrarily long chains of direct products of finite dihedral groups. For
further reading on the Burnside problem, see, for example, [Adi79; Ols89; Iva92; DG08; Cou14;
Cou21; ART23].
   As already observed above, sharply 2-transitive groups contain plenty of involutions, and one
of the challenges we have to face is to keep these involutions under control when taking small
cancellation quotients (and it is in order to maintain this control that we need to restrict ourselves
to characteristic p ≡ 3 (mod 4), see Remark 6.9 for a more detailed explanation). The framework
we use for this purpose is that of geometric small cancellation.
   In the 1910’s, Dehn proved that for the fundamental group of a closed orientable surface of
genus at least two the word problem is solvable. His work involved negative curvature, and was
a precursor for small cancellation theory. Small cancellation conditions were formulated explicitly
for the first time by Tartakovskii in 1947. Then, small cancellation theory was developed notably
by Greendlinger in the early 1960’s and by Lyndon and Schupp around the same time to study
groups given by group presentations where defining relations have small overlaps with each other.
However, the geometric origins of small cancellation theory were gradually forgotten in favour of
combinatorial and topological methods. According to Gromov, ‘the role of curvature was reduced
to a metaphor (algebraists do not trust geometry)’, and he proposed to return to the geometric
sources of small cancellation theory. This point of view appears in Gromov’s paper [Gro01], and
was then developed extensively by Delzant and Gromov in [DG08], by Arzhantseva and Delzant
in [AD08], by Coulon in [Cou11; Cou14; Cou16b; Cou21], by Cantat, Lamy and de Cornulier in
[CLC13], and by Dahmani, Guirardel and Osin in [DGO17] (see also [Cou16a]). In this article, we
will develop a further adaptation of the methods of Coulon, as was already done in [AAT23].
Structure of the paper. In Section 2, we give some preliminaries about sharply 2-transitive
groups and we introduce two classes of groups (a modification of the ones from [AAT23]) that will
be key when proving Theorem 1.1. In Section 3, we give a proof of Theorems 1.1 and 1.3, assuming
two technical results whose proofs are postponed to Sections 7 and 8. The remainder of the article
is devoted to developing the necessary background to prove these two results: in Section 4 we
introduce some background on hyperbolic spaces and group actions on them. Later, in Section
5 we introduce the small cancellation framework that will be applied iteratively in Section 6 to
obtain partial periodic quotients of groups with some negative curvature features.
Acknowledgement. The author would like to thank Simon André, Rémi Coulon and Katrin Tent
for several helpful and stimulating discussions on the topics of this paper.

                                         2. Preliminaries
   In this section we will recall and introduce some basics on sharply 2-transitive groups.
   We begin by fixing some terminology and notation. Let G be a group, we will call an element
r of order 2 in G an involution. For two distinct involutions r and s of G, we call their product
rs a translation. For an arbitrary element g ∈ G, we write |g| for the order of g. Furthermore, for
elements g and h of G, we adopt the convention that the conjugate of g by h is h−1 gh.
Notation. For a group G and an arbitrary subset S ⊆ G, we will write:
    • IS for the set of involutions of S,
        (2)
    • IS for the set of ordered pairs of distinct involutions of S,
    • T RS for the set of translations of S, and
                           (2)
    • for a pair (r, s) ∈ IG , Dr,s for ⟨r, s⟩.
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                5


   Moreover, for a subgroup H ≤ G, we put NG (H) for the normalizer of H in G, and for g ∈ G
we put Cen(g) for the centralizer of g in G. Furthermore, for a prime number p we will write Fp
for the finite field with p elements. Also, for n ≥ 2 we will write Cn for the cyclic group of order
n and Dn for the dihedral group of order 2n
Definition 2.1. An action of a group G on a set X is sharply 2-transitive if for every two ordered
pairs (x1 , y1 ) and (x2 , y2 ) of distinct elements of X there exists a unique g ∈ G such that g ·x1 = x2
and g · y1 = y2 .
   We collect in the following lemma a number of classical results about sharply 2-transitive groups
(see for example [Ten16]).
Lemma 2.2. Let G be a group acting sharply 2-transitively on a set X. Then, IG forms a single
non-empty conjugacy class. In particular, either every involution has a (necessarily unique) fixed
point, or no involution has one.
   Furthermore, if involutions have fixed points, then there is a G-equivariant bijection IG −→ X
given by r 7−→ Fix(r), where we consider the action of G by conjugation on IG . In particular,
T RG also forms a conjugacy class.
   In view of the previous lemma, we can now define the characteristic of a sharply 2-transitive
group action.
Definition 2.3. Let G be a group acting sharply 2-transitively on a set X. The characteristic is
defined as
      • 2 if involutions of G have no fixed points,
      • p if involutions of G have fixed points and all translations of G have order p, or
      • 0 if involutions of G have fixed points and all translations of G have infinite order.
   Notice that, since being a translation is closed under taking powers, the characteristic of a
sharply 2-transitive group is necessarily 0 or a prime number.
   As a direct consequence of Lemma 2.2 and Definition 2.3 we have the following fact.
Lemma 2.4. A group G acts sharply 2-transitively on a set X with characteristic ̸= 2 if and only
                                      (2)
if G acts freely and transitively on IG with the same characteristic.
    In particular, when we consider a sharply 2-transitive action of characteristic ̸= 2, as is the case
for all actions considered in this article, we may omit mentioning the set X (assuming it to be
  (2)
IG ) and talk about a sharply 2-transitive group G without explicit mention of the action. We
adopt from now on this convention.
    We introduce now the last remaining concept related to the objects of study of this article, that
is, that of a split sharply 2-transitive group, as well as a criterion to characterize split sharply
2-transitive groups in terms of its set of translations.
Definition 2.5. A sharply 2-transitive group splits (we also say it is split) if it contains a non-
trivial normal abelian subgroup.
Theorem 2.6. (see [Neu40]) A sharply 2-transitive group G splits if and only if T RG ∪ {1} forms
an abelian subgroup.
   The previous criterion by Bernhard Neumann will be central in proving that the sharply 2-
transitive groups we construct do not split: we will show that they contain non-commuting trans-
lations.
   The remainder of this section will be aimed at introducing two classes, WST (p, q1 , q2 ) and
WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ), which will be used in the construction of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups
of bounded exponent. The conditions defining class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) are similar to those for class
ST (p) in [AAT23] (as well as those considered in [RT19; AT23; AG22]), modified to obtain groups
of bounded exponent. In order to be able to take small cancellation quotients as discussed in
6                                          MARCO AMELIO


Section 1, we introduce as well class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) (similar to class ST ′ (p) in [AAT23]), whose
elements are pairs composed of a group G and a tree X endowed with an action of G satisfying a
number of technical assumptions that will allow us to take the aforementioned quotients.
   We begin by reintroducing in Definition 2.7 two concepts from [AAT23] to classify pairs of
distinct involutions of a group that will be key in the inductive steps necessary to prove Theorem
1.1: pairs of p-minimal and p-affine type. Intuitively, these two classes can be thought of in
                                                           (2)
the following way: for a pair of involutions (r, s) ∈ IG , the automorphisms of Dr,s induced by
conjugation by some element of G are as few as possible (only inner automorphisms of Dp ) in case
the pair is of p-minimal type, and as many as possible (the whole group Aut(Dp )) in case the pair
is of p-affine type.
                                                                              (2)
Definition 2.7. Let G be a group, p an odd prime number, and (r, s) ∈ IG .
     • We say that the pair (r, s) is of p-minimal type if |rs| = p and NG (⟨rs⟩) = Dr,s .
     • We say that the pair (r, s) is of p-affine type if Dr,s is contained in a subgroup H of G
       isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ).
                            (2)
Remark 2.8. Let (r, s) ∈ IG .
    (1) Since ⟨rs⟩ is a characteristic subgroup of Dr,s , we have that NG (Dr,s ) ≤ NG (⟨rs⟩). In
        particular, if the pair is of p-minimal type we have that NG (Dr,s ) = Dr,s .
    (2) It is a known fact that AGL(1, Fp ) has a unique subgroup D isomorphic to Dp and that
        every involution of AGL(1, Fp ) is contained in this subgroup D. Therefore, if the pair
        (r, s) is of p-affine type, then the isomorphism from H onto AGL(1, Fp ) as in Definition 2.7
        induces an isomorphism from Dr,s onto D (so in particular |rs| = p), and H acts sharply
        2-transitively on IDr,s . Furthermore, if no non-trivial element of G centralizes r and s
        then NG (Dr,s ) = H, so NG (Dr,s ) ∼    = AGL(1, Fp ) (since H already acts 2-transitively by
        conjugation on IDr,s ). From this discussion together with the fact that every pair of distinct
        involutions of Dp generate the whole subgroup, it also follows that AGL(1, Fp ) ∼  = Aut(Dp ).
                                (2)
    (3) Clearly, if (r, s) ∈ IG is of p-affine (respectively, p-minimal) type, then so is every conju-
        gate of (r, s).
  We are ready to introduce now the auxiliary notions of a weakly sharply 2-transitive group of
characteristic p and of one such group of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent.
Definition 2.9. Let G be a group, p be an odd prime number such that p ≡ 3 (mod 4), q1 and
q2 odd integers. We will say that G is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p if it satisfies
the following conditions.
                                                                                              (2)
    (1) Every translation is either of order p or of infinite order, and every pair (r, s) ∈ IG such
        that rs is of order p is either of p-minimal type or of p-affine type.
                                    (2)
    (2) The set of pairs (r, s) ∈ IG of p-affine type is non-empty and G acts transitively on it by
        conjugation.
                                 (2)
    (3) For every pair (r, s) ∈ IG , the subgroup CenG (rs) is cyclic and generated by a translation.
In addition, we say that G is of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent if the following holds.
    (4) For every subgroup E of finite order, either E embeds into AGL(1, Fp ) or E falls into one
        of the following cases.
         (a) The subgroup E is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to Cq1 and no element of E
             centralizes an involution.
         (b) The subgroup E is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to C2q2 (and thus every element
             of E centralizes an involution).
Remark 2.10. Notice that a weakly sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p of (q1 , q2 )-almost
bounded exponent for odd integers q1 and q2 contains no subgroup of order 4: indeed, Cq1 and
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                 7


C2q2 clearly contain no subgroups of order 4. Meanwhile, the order of AGL(1, Fp ) is p(p − 1), and
since p ≡ 3 (mod 4), this is an integer not divisible by 4.
Remark 2.11. The following observation justifies the terminology: if G is weakly sharply 2-
                                                                                              (2)
transitive of characteristic p, has no translation of infinite order and every pair (r, s) ∈ IG is
of p-affine type, then G is sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p. Indeed, we have to prove that
           (2)
the set IG is non-empty and that G acts transitively and freely on it. The only non-obvious
                                  (2)
point is that G acts freely on IG , or equivalently that no non-trivial element of G centralizes
two distinct involutions. Suppose towards a contradiction that one such element g ∈ G centralizes
distinct involutions r, s. Then g is in Cen(rs) = ⟨h⟩ for some translation h ∈ G, but Cen(rs)
contains the translation rs, which is of order p, so Cen(rs) = ⟨rs⟩. However, rs does not commute
with r, and we arrive at a contradiction.
   Furthermore, if a weakly sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p is of (q1 , q2 )-almost
bounded exponent with no elements of infinite order, then it is in fact of exponent bounded by
lcm(q1 , q2 , p, p − 1).
Remark 2.12. The similar notion of an almost sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p was
introduced in [AAT23]. In that article, the authors require the extra condition that the (normal)
subgroup ⟨T RG ⟩ contains no involutions. The purpose of this assumption is to control the small
cancellation parameters that the authors use to produce non-split sharply 2-transitive groups of
characteristic p. In the setting of this article, no condition of that kind is required on ⟨T RG ⟩
for the small cancellation results introduced in Sections 5 and 6, and therefore we do not need to
include any such assumption. The control of the parameters is achieved instead by the requirement
that p ≡ 3 (mod 4) (through Remark 2.10), which is not included in the definition of an almost
sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p in [AAT23].
   As it was explained before, in this article we will construct non-split sharply 2-transitive groups
of odd characteristic and bounded exponent by successive steps of alternating HNN-extensions with
small cancellation quotients. The following definitions and results have the purpose of keeping the
small cancellation parameters under control when taking HNN-extensions.
Definition 2.13. (See [AAT23, Definition 2.6]) Let G be a group, K and K ′ subgroups of G.
We say that K is quasi-malnormal if for all g ∈ G\K we have that |K ∩ g −1 Kg| ≤ 2. We say that
the pair (K, K ′ ) is jointly quasi-malnormal if K is quasi-malnormal and for all g ∈ G we have that
|K ∩ g −1 K ′ g| ≤ 2.
   The next result appears as Lemma 2.7 and Remark 2.8 in [AAT23].
                                                                   (2)
Lemma 2.14. Let G be a group, (r, s) and (r′ , s′ ) pairs in IG .
  (1) The pair (r, s) is of p-minimal type if and only if Dr,s is quasi-malnormal.
  (2) If (r, s) is of p-minimal type and (r′ , s′ ) is of p-affine type, then the pair (Dr,s , Dr′ ,s′ ) is
      jointly quasi-malnormal.
Definition 2.15. (Compare [AAT23, Definition 2.9]) A group G is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) if it
is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent and all of its
elements are of finite order.
Remark 2.16. (Compare [AAT23, Remark 2.10]) Class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) is non-empty since it con-
tains AGL(1, Fp ). Furthermore, a group in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) has every translation of order p,
                      (2)
and if every pair in IG is of p-affine type, then it is sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p.
   Let us state again how the necessity for small cancellation quotients arises, so as to motivate
the introduction of class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ). As was stated before, in Section 3 we will outline the
construction of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic p of bounded exponent by a
sequence of HNN-extensions that will ensure that every pair of distinct involutions is conjugate.
8                                            MARCO AMELIO


More concretely, we will take HNN-extensions of groups in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) conjugating pairs
of distinct involutions that were not conjugate in the base group. However, in doing this, we
will create elements of infinite order, some of which will be translations. In particular, a pair of
involution whose product gives such translation cannot possibly be conjugate to a pair generating
a finite dihedral group, and such a group will clearly not be of bounded exponent. Therefore, we
need to take a ‘controlled quotient’ in order to come back to WST (p, q1 , q2 ). Geometric small
cancellation provides the framework for this, where we consider the action of the HNN-extension
on its Bass-Serre tree. To that purpose, we introduce class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) associated to a group
action on a metric space. Definition 2.17 involves parameters of this action in consideration, which
will be introduced in Sections 4, 5 and 6.
Definition 2.17. Let G be a group acting by isometries and without inversion of edges on a
simplicial tree X. We say that the pair (G, X) is in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) if G is weakly sharply
2-transitive of characteristic p of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent and the following conditions
are satisfied.
    (1’) The action of G on X is non-elementary and acylindrical.
    (2’) The action is tame and is such that τ (G, X) ≤ 5 and Ω(G, X) = 0 (see Subsection 4.4 for
         the definition of the parameters); and the integers p, q1 and q2 are at least n′1 (where the
         value of n′1 will be specified in Remark 6.8, it is at least n1 , where n1 is the value of the
         parameter provided by Theorem 6.7 for these parameters, rinj (G, X) ≥ 1 and hyperbolicity
         constant δ = 0).
    (3’) Every element of infinite order of G is loxodromic by its action on X.
Remark 2.18. In Subsection 4.4 we will prove Lemma 4.48, implying the following fact: let (G, X)
be a pair in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) and g ∈ G of finite order ≥ 3. Then, NG (⟨g⟩) is elliptic (and
therefore so is CenG (g)).

                                     3. Outline of the proofs
   In this section, we prove Theorems 1.1 and 1.3, modulo proving Propositions 3.1 and 3.2. The
remainder of the article will be devoted to developing the necessary framework for proving these
results. In Subsection 3.1 we prove Theorem 1.1, while in Subsection 3.2 we show how Theorem
1.1 together with a model-theoretic compactness argument proves Theorem 1.3.
   We now state Propositions 3.1 and 3.2 for future reference in this section. The first of them will
be proved in Section 8. The second one will be proved in Section 7.
Proposition 3.1. Let G be a group in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) for integers p, q1 and q2 at least n′1 .
                                       (2)
Let (r, s) and (r′ , s′ ) be pairs in IG with (r, s) of p-affine type and (r′ , s′ ) of p-minimal type (so
that both Dr,s and Dr′ ,s′ are isomorphic to Dp ). Then the following holds.
    (1) Let G∗ = G ∗ Z and X the Bass-Serre tree of the splitting of G∗ as an HNN-extension of
        G with trivial associated subgroups. Then, the pair (G∗ , X) is in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ).
    (2) Let G∗ be the following HNN-extension:
                                     ⟨G, t | t−1 rt = r′ , t−1 st = s′ ⟩,
         (an HNN-extension of G with associated subgroups Dr,s and Dr′ ,s′ ). Let X be the Bass-
         Serre tree of this splitting of G∗ . Then, the pair (G∗ , X) is in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ).
Moreover, the group G∗ has the following additional properties.
    (1’) In case (1), G∗ contains a translation of infinite order and translation length at most 2.
    (2’) In case (1), G∗ contains an element of infinite order that is not a translation, that has
         translation length 1 and that centralizes no involution.
    (3’) In case (2), if |Dr,s ∩ Dr′ ,s′ | = 2, then G∗ contains an element of infinite order (which is
         not a translation), that has translation length 1 and that centralizes an involution.
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                             9


   We will show in Subsection 3.1 that at some point of the inductive process carried out to
construct non-split sharply 2-transitive groups of bounded exponent, we will indeed find ourselves
taking HNN-extensions of groups satisfying the conditions of Property (3’) of Proposition 3.1.
   The next proposition shows how to ‘come back’ to class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) by taking a quotient of
a group in WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) (for example, after applying Proposition 3.1).
Proposition 3.2. Let (G, X) be a pair in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) for some prime p and odd numbers
q1 and q2 . Then, G has a quotient group Ḡ that is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) with the following
additional properties.
    (1) Every involution of Ḡ is the image of an involution of G.
    (2) If F is an elliptic subgroup of G (for its action on X), then the projection map G ↠ Ḡ
        induces an isomorphism from F onto its image.
                                         (2)
    (3) The image of a pair (r, s) ∈ IG of p-affine (respectively, of p-minimal) type is again of
                                                                                 (2)
        p-affine (respectively, of p-minimal) type. Moreover, a pair (r̄, s̄) ∈ IḠ is of p-affine type
                                                       (2)
       if and only if every preimage of the pair in IG is of p-affine type.
   (4) Let g ∈ G be an element of finite order ≥ 3, and let ḡ be its image on Ḡ. Then, the
       projection map G ↠ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from NG (⟨g⟩) onto NḠ (⟨ḡ⟩) (and thus also
       from CenG (g) onto CenḠ (ḡ)).
   (5) If G contains a translation of infinite order and translation length at most 2, then Ḡ
       contains non-commuting translations.
   (6) If G contains an element of infinite order that is not a translation, that has translation
       length 1 and that centralizes no involution, then Ḡ contains an element of order q1 that is
       not a translation and centralizes no involution.
   (7) If G contains an element of infinite order (which is not a translation), that has translation
       length 1 and that centralizes an involution, then Ḡ contains an element of order q2 which
       is not a translation and centralizes an involution.
   We will also make use of the following observation, which is an immediate consequence of the
definition of class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) (Definition 2.15).
Remark 3.3. If a group G is the union of an infinite ascending chain of subgroups Hλ for λ < γ,
all of them in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ), then G itself is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ).
3.1. Non-split sharply 2-transitive groups of bounded exponent. In this section we will
prove the main result of our article, Theorem 3.4. It is a strengthening of Theorem 1.1. We closely
follow the proof of Theorem 2.17 in [AAT23].
Theorem 3.4. There exists an odd number q ′ with the following property: let p ≥ q ′ be a
prime number such that p ≡ 3 (mod 4), and let q1 , q2 ≥ q ′ be a pair of odd numbers. Let
G ∈ WST (p, q1 , q2 ). Then, G embeds into a non-split sharply 2-transitive group G of charac-
teristic p, exponent lcm(q1 , q2 , p, p − 1) and cardinality max{ℵ0 , |G|}.
   Moreover, there exist elements g and g ′ in G such that neither of them is a translation, g
centralizes no involution and is of order q1 , and g ′ centralizes an involution and is of order q2 .
   In addition, the following holds: for every element g of G, either g is contained in a subgroup
of G that embeds into AGL(1, Fp ) or g falls into one of the following cases.
    (1) The element g centralizes no involution and is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to Cq1 .
    (2) The element g centralizes an involution and is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to C2q2 .
Proof. Let q ′ be n′1 , the odd integer given in Definition 2.17 Condition (2’). Let p ≥ q ′ be a
prime number such that p ≡ 3 (mod 4), and let q1 , q2 ≥ q ′ be odd numbers. Let G be a group
in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) and put G∗ = G ∗ Z and X for the Bass-Serre tree of the splitting of G∗
as an HNN-extension of G with trivial associated subgroups. Since G is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ),
Proposition 3.1 gives that the pair (G∗ , X) is in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ). Furthermore, G∗ contains
translations of infinite order and of translation length at most 2, and an element of infinite order
10                                                 MARCO AMELIO


that is not a translation, that has translation length 1 and that centralizes no involution. Write
G00 = Ḡ∗ , where Ḡ∗ is the group obtained from the pair (G∗ , X) by applying Proposition 3.2. In
particular, Consequence (2) of this proposition implies that, since (the isomorphic image in G∗ of)
G is elliptic by its action on X, G embeds into G00 . Furthermore, Consequence (5) gives that G00
contains non-commuting translations, and Consequence (6) implies that G00 contains an element g
that is not a translation, centralizes no involution and has order q1 .
                                                 (2)
   We now fix a pair of involutions (r, s) ∈ IG0 of p-affine type, and we enumerate all pairs of
                                                          0
                   (2)
involutions in IG0 as {(r0λ , sλ0 ) : λ < γ}. We will build inductively a sequence of groups Gα                  0 for
                     0
α < γ. For a successor ordinal α + 1, suppose that Gα           0   has  already     been   built,  that this group  is
in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ), that G00 embeds in Gα      0 , that g   is  not  a translation     in  this group,  that  g
                                   α                             β β
centralizes no involution of G0 , and that every pair (r0 , s0 ) : β < α is of p-affine type. Consider
                                                                      α+1
the pair (r0α , sα
                 0 ). If this pair is of p-affine type, we put G0          = Gα  0 . If it is of p-minimal type, we
set
                                         ∗            −1
                                   (Gα          α
                                      0 ) = ⟨G0 , t|t    rt = r0α , t−1 st = sα 0 ⟩.
This is a well-defined HNN-extension since both Dr,s and Dr0 ,s0 are isomorphic to Dp . Clearly
                                                                            α  α

                          ∗
G00 embeds into (Gα                                          α α
                       0 ) and in this group the pair (r0 , s0 ) is of p-affine type. Moreover, by Lemma
                    α ∗                          ′
3.1 the pair ((G0 ) , X) is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) (where X is the Bass-Serre tree of the HNN-
extension). Thus, Remark 2.18 gives that N(Gα0 )∗ (⟨g⟩) is elliptic, and therefore g is not a translation
                                            ∗                                                                      α ∗
and centralizes no involution of (Gα                                                                     α ∗
                                         0 ) . Now, by Proposition 3.2, there is a quotient (G0 ) of (G0 )
                                                                                                                      ∗
such that this group is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ). In addition, since (the isomorphic image in (Gα                0)
      0                                                                α ∗                                         α ∗
of) G0 is elliptic by its action on X, then it embeds into (G0 ) . Similarly, the subgroup H of (G0 )
isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ) containing Dr0α ,sα0 is finite and therefore elliptic, and thus it embeds into
                             α α                                                                     λ λ
(Gα   ∗                                                         α ∗
   0 ) . In particular, (r0 , s0 ) is of p-affine type in (G0 ) , and thus every pair (r0 , s0 ) of distinct
involutions is of p-affine type for λ ≤ α. Moreover, Consequence (4) of Proposition 3.2 implies that
g is not a translation and centralizes no involution in this group. Set then Gα+1              0     = (Gα  ∗
                                                                                                          0) .
                                       α
                                              S β
   If α is a limit ordinal, we set G0 =           G0 . By Remark 3.3 this group is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ),
                                             β<α
                                                                β β
G00 embeds into Gα  0 and every pair of distinct involutions (r0 , s0 ) for β < α is of p-affine type.
Clearly g is not a translation and centralizes no involution in this union.
   Set now G01 =
                   S λ
                      G0 . As in the previous paragraph, this group is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ), G00
                       λ<γ
embeds into G01 , g is not a translation in this group and centralizes no involution of G01 , and every
          (2)
pair in IG0 is of p-affine type in G01 . Furthermore, by construction the cardinality of G01 is the
            0
maximum of the cardinality of G and ℵ0 .
   Now, we build G0i+1 from G0i in a completely analogous way to how the construction of G01 from
                                              (2)
G00 : we enumerate the pairs (riβ , sβi ) of IG0 and conjugate pairs of p-minimal type to the pair of
                                                i
p-affine type (r, s). Assume that at step α + 1 we have built a group Gα         i in class WST (p, q1 , q2 )
such that Gα  0 embeds  into it (and therefore    so does G 0
                                                            0 ), such that every pair (riβ , sβi ) is of p-affine
           α
type in Gi for β < α, and such that g is not a translation and centralizes no involution in this
group. If at this step we need to take an HNN-extension, Propositions 3.1 and 3.2 ensure that we
can construct a group Gα+1 i    with the same properties as we mentioned for Gα        i and with (r
                                                                                                           α α
                                                                                                         Si , siλ)
                                                                                                 0
of p-affine type. Finally, when taking unions at the limit steps and when taking Gi+1 =                      Gi ,
                                                                                                             λ<γ
Remark 3.3 ensures that G0i+1 is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ). Furthermore, G0i (and thus also G00 )
embeds into G0i+1 , g is not a translation and centralizes no involution of G0i+1 , and in this group
               (2)
every pair of IG0 is of p-affine type, since one such pair is conjugate to (r, s). Again, we have by
                   i
construction that the cardinality of G0i+1 is the maximum of the cardinality of G and ℵ0 .
   Notice that the group G∗ has a dihedral subgroup of infinite order containing the involution r
(take for example Dr,t−1 rt , where t is the generator of the Z factor of the free product). The image
                 NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                 11


of this pair in G00 , which we denote by (r, r′ ), is necessarily of p-minimal type by Consequence (3)
of Proposition 3.2. Now, the pair (r, r′ ) is guaranteed to be of p-affine type (and thus, conjugate
to (r, s)) in G02 , which implies that one of the HNN-extensions considered until this step, in fact,
satisfied Condition (3’) of Proposition 3.1. Thus, by Consequence (7) of Proposition 3.2 there is
some β < γ such that Gβ1 contains an element g ′ contained in a subgroup isomorphic to C2q2 which
is not a translation. Then, an argument using normalizers, Consequence (4) of Proposition 3.2
(analogous to the one used for g) gives that, throughout all of the induction process, g ′ is contained
                     S 0 to C2q2 and is not a translation.
in a subgroup isomorphic
   Set now G =         Gi . By Remark 3.3 this group is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ). We claim that this
                  i∈N
                                                                                                     (2)
group satisfied the announced properties. In fact, every pair of involutions (r′ , s′ ) ∈ IG is of
                                                                   (2)
p-affine type: if j is the minimal integer such that (r′ , s′ ) ∈ IG0 , then the pair (r′ , s′ ) is guaranteed
                                                                     j

to be of p-affine type in G0j+1 (and in consequence also in G). In particular, by Remark 2.16
the group is sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p. In addition, by Remark 2.11 this group is of
exponent at most lcm(q1 , q2 , p, p − 1). By construction, G00 embeds into G, so this group contains
non-commuting translations. In particular, by Theorem 2.6 G is non-split. The element g has
order q1 , and it centralizes no involution of G since it does not centralize an involution in any G0j
for j ∈ N. The element g ′ is contained in a subgroup of G isomorphic to Cq2 . Neither g nor g ′ can
be a translation in G, since they are not translations in any of the intermediate steps G0j for j ∈ N.
In particular, since AGL(1, Fp ) also embeds into G, this group contains elements of order q1 , q2 , p
and p − 1, so, in fact, its exponent is exactly lcm(q1 , q2 , p, p − 1). The claim that every element of
G that is not contained in a subgroup that embeds into AGL(1, Fp ) either centralizes no involution
and is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to Cq1 or centralizes an involution and is contained in
a subgroup isomorphic to C2q2 follows directly from the fact that G is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ).
Finally, once again by construction we have that the cardinality of G is the maximum of the
cardinality of G and ℵ0 . Thus, G is a group as claimed by Theorem 3.4.                               □

3.2. Non-split non-periodic sharply 2-transitive groups with bounded exponent stabi-
lizers. In this subsection we will prove Theorem 1.3. For the sake of completeness, we restate it
here.
Theorem 3.5. There exists an odd number q ′ with the following property: let p ≥ q ′ be a prime
number such that p ≡ 3 (mod 4) and q2 ≥ q ′ an odd number. There exists a non-periodic non-
split sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p such that the centralizer of every involution is of
exponent bounded by lcm(q2 , p, p − 1) and it contains an element of order q2 .
   In particular, by taking all possible values of the prime number q2 , we get the following corollary.
Corollary 3.6. There exists a prime number p′ with the following property: let p ≥ p′ be a primer
number such that p ≡ 3 (mod 4). There exist infinitely many countable pairwise non-isomorphic
non-periodic non-split sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic p such that the centralizer of
every involution has bounded exponent.
   Now, centralizers of involutions coincide with point stabilizers of the action of a group G on the
set IG . Therefore, since the action in consideration on Theorem 3.5 and Corollary 3.6 is precisely
the action by conjugation on the set of involutions, these results provide a positive answer to
Question 2 (see Section 1).
   As was stated in the beginning of this section, the proof of Theorem 3.5 uses Theorem 1.1 and
some (very mild) model-theoretic methods. We assume the reader to be familiar with some very ba-
sic model-theoretic concepts such as language, first-order sentence, first-order theory, satisfiability,
definability and a model of a first-order theory.
   The key result is the very well-known model-theoretic Compactness theorem. We say that a set
of first order sentences Σ (over a language L ) is consistent if it has a model. We say that such
12                                           MARCO AMELIO


a set of sentences is finitely satisfiable if every finite subset of Σ is consistent. The Compactness
Theorem says that these two notions actually coincide.
Theorem 3.7. Compactness Theorem, (see for example [TZ12, Theorem 2.2.1]). Let Σ be a set
of first order sentences. Then, Σ is consistent if and only if it is finitely satisfiable.
    We exhibit in Lemmas 3.8 to Lemma 3.11 a series of first-order properties (in the language of
groups LGrp = {·, e}, where the inverse function −1 is definable) that will allow us to produce
non-periodic groups with the desired properties. The first order sentences defining each of these
properties are not explicitly stated, but they can be easily constructed with some elementary
first-order logic (the interested reader may check the first chapters of [TZ12]).
Lemma 3.8. The property of a group G of being non-split sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p
is definable.
     Call φnssh2tr (p) the first-order sentence provided by Lemma 3.8.
Lemma 3.9. The property of a group G of having centralizers of involutions of exponent at most
a given positive integer n is definable. Furthermore, it is also definable if we ask the centralizers
of involutions to contain an element of a given order n′ .
     Call φexp(Cinv) (n, n′ ) the first-order sentence provided by Lemma 3.9.
Lemma 3.10. The property of a group G of having an element of order larger than a given n ∈ N
is definable. Moreover, if we add the extra condition that the element centralizes no involution, it
is still a first-order property.
     Call φ′exp (n) and φexp (n) the first and second first-order sentences provided by Lemma 3.10.
Lemma 3.11. The following property of a group G is definable: there is an element g ∈ G that is
not a translation, centralizes no involution and if it has order larger than a given positive integer
n, then its order is at least another given integer n′ > n.
     Call φexp ninv (n, n′ ) the first-order sentence provided by Lemma 3.11.
     We are now ready to prove Theorem 3.5.
Proof of Theorem 3.5. We denote by Σ′ (p, q2 ) the set of first-order sentences built as follows. First,
it contains the axioms for groups. It also contains the sentences φnssh2tr (p) and φexp(Cinv) (p(p −
1)q2 , q2 ). Notice that any group satisfying this set of sentences will be non-split sharply 2-transitive
of characteristic p with centralizers of involutions of exponent at most p(p−1)q2 , and it will contain
an element of order q2 centralizing each involution. By Theorem 3.4, there is an odd integer q ′ such
that for every prime p ≥ q ′ such that p ≡ 3 (mod 4) and odd integer q2 ≥ q ′ this set of sentences
is consistent.
   Now, we write Σ(p, q2 , q1 ) for the set of sentences consisting of the union of Σ′ (p, q2 ) and the set
consisting of φexp (p(p − 1)) and φexp ninv (p(p − 1), q1 ). Once again, by Theorem 3.4, for q ′ , p and
q2 as in the previous paragraph the set Σ(p, q2 , p1 ) is consistent for every prime integer p1 ≥ q ′
(we add the assumption that the third parameter is prime so that every element not centralizing
an involution and not contained in a subgroup embedding into AGL(1,S         Fp ) has the same order p1 ).
   Now, let Σ(p, q2 ) be the following set of sentences: Σ(p, q2 ) =            Σ(p, q2 , q1 ). This set of
                                                                           q1 ∈N
sentences is finitely satisfiable: any finite subset requires the order of elements not centralizing
involutions or contained in a subgroup embedding into AGL(1, Fp ) to be at least a given positive
integer, and thus by the previous paragraph this finite subset is in fact consistent. By Theorem
3.7 this set is consistent, and thus there is a group G satisfying it.
   Now, we have that, as was observed before, G is a non-split sharply 2-transitive group of
characteristic p, with centralizers of involutions of exponent at most p(p − 1)q2 and containing
an element of order q2 centralizing an involution. By construction, since this group contains
φexp ninv (p(p − 1), q1 ) for all positive integers q1 , then any element not centralizing an involution
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                              13


or contained in a subgroup embedding into AGL(1, Fp ) has infinite order. Since this group also
satisfies the sentence φexp (p(p − 1)), one such element of G exists, and thus G is non-periodic. □

                      4. Hyperbolic metric spaces and group actions
   In this section, we recall some concepts from metric geometry. We begin with a brief overview on
the basics of length metric spaces and quasi-geodesics in Subsection 4.1 (see for example [BBI22,
Chapter 2]). In Subsection 4.2 we recall some properties of Gromov-hyperbolic spaces, and in
Subsection 4.3 we study the actions by isometries of groups on these spaces. Finally, in Section 4.4
we study some invariants of a group action on a hyperbolic space, some of them appearing in
[Cou16b, Section 3.5], and some other newly defined in this article. We closely follow the exposition
by Coulon in [Cou16b, Sections 2 and 3].
   For a metric space X and two points x and x′ of X, we will denote by dX (x, x′ ) (or eventually
just d(x, x′ ) if the metric space is clear from the context) the distance between x and x′ .
4.1. Length metric spaces and quasi-geodesics. For this subsection fix a metric space (X, d).
By a path in X we mean a continuous map γ : I −→ X, where I ⊆ R is an interval (possibly
consisting of a single point).
Definition 4.1. Let γ : [a, b] −→ X be a path.
     • A partition of the interval [a, b] is a finite subset Y = {y0 , . . . yN } such that a = y0 ≤ y1 ≤
       · · · ≤ yN = b.
     • The sum (in γ) of a partition Y is
                                              N
                                              X
                                    Σ(Y ) =         d(γ(yi−1 ), γ(yi )).
                                              i=1

      • The length Ld (γ) of γ with respect to d is
                           Ld (γ) = sup{Σ(Y ) : Y is a partition of [a, b]}.
Definition 4.2. Let (X, d) be connected by rectifiable paths. The intrinsic metric dℓ on X is
                    dℓ (x, y) = inf{Ld (γ) : γ : [a, b] −→ X, γ(a) = x, γ(b) = y}.
Where the infimum is taken on the set of all paths from x to y. The metric space (X, d) is a length
space if dℓ = d. If, in addition, (X, d) has the property that there is always a path γ that achieves
the infimum, then (X, d) is a geodesic space, and one such path γ achieving the infimum is called
a geodesic.
  We now recall the concepts of a quasi-isometric embedding and of a quasi-geodesic.
Definition 4.3. Let X1 and X2 be two metric spaces, ℓ, L ≥ 0 and k ≥ 1, f : X1 −→ X2 a map.
     • The map f is a (k, ℓ)-quasi-isometric embedding if for every x, y ∈ X1 we have:
                      1
                        dX (f (x), f (y)) − ℓ ≤ dX1 (x, y) ≤ kdX2 (f (x), f (y)) + ℓ.
                     k 2
     • If it also holds that for every x2 ∈ X2 there is some x1 ∈ X1 such that dX2 (f (x1 ), x2 ) ≤ ℓ,
       then f is a (k, ℓ)-quasi-isometry.
     • The map f is an L-local (k, ℓ)-quasi-isometric embedding if its restriction to any subset of
       diameter at most L is a (k, ℓ)-quasi-isometric embedding.
Definition 4.4. Let I ⊆ R be an interval and γ : I −→ X a path. If γ is a (k, ℓ)-quasi-isometric
embedding we call it a (k, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic. If it is an L-local (k, ℓ)-quasi-isometric embedding we
call it an L-local (k, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic.
Remark 4.5. Note that for k = 1 and ℓ = 0, f is a genuine isometric embedding in Definition 4.3,
and γ is a genuine geodesic in Definition 4.4.
14                                            MARCO AMELIO


Remark 4.6. We will repeatedly make use of the following very useful fact about length spaces:
if (X, d) is such a space, by definition of the infimum, for every x, y ∈ X and every ℓ > 0, there
exists a path γ : [a, b] → X such that d(x, y) ≤ Ld (γ) ≤ d(x, y) + ℓ. After reparametrizing γ (by
arc length) if necessary, we can assume that a = 0 and b = Ld (γ) and thus that Ld (γ) = |b − a|.
Hence, γ is a (1, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic (and thus it is a (k, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic for every k ≥ 1).
4.2. Hyperbolic metric spaces. For a metric space X, a point x in X and a subset Y of X, we
will write
                               dX (x, Y ) = inf {dX (x, y)}
                                                     y∈Y

for the distance between x and Y . Also, for a subset Y of X we will write diam(Y ) for the diameter
of Y , that is,
                                   diam(Y ) = sup (dX (y, y ′ )).
                                                   y,y ′ ∈Y

We will put BX (x, r) (or simply B(x, r) if the metric space X is clear by context) for the ball of
radius r centered at x.
Definition 4.7. Let x, y and z be three points of X. The Gromov product of x and y with respect
to z is
                                        1
                            ⟨x, y⟩z = {d(x, z) + d(y, z) − d(x, y)}.
                                        2
A metric space X is said to be δ-hyperbolic (in the sense of Gromov) if for every four points
x, y, z, t ∈ X we have
                                ⟨x, z⟩t ≥ min{⟨x, y⟩t , ⟨y, z⟩t } − δ.
We will say that X is hyperbolic if it is δ-hyperbolic for some δ ≥ 0.
Remark 4.8. For simplicity of notation, from now on we assume that the hyperbolicity constant
δ is positive. However, notice that this is not a serious constraint: if X is δ-hyperbolic for δ ≥ 0,
then it is δ ′ -hyperbolic for every δ ′ ≥ δ. In particular, a 0-hyperbolic space can be thought of as
being δ-hyperbolic for arbitrarily small δ.
Definition 4.9. Let X be a metric space, x1 , · · · , xn distinct points of X and l ≥ 0. A (1, l)-quasi-
geodesic n-gon with vertices x1 , · · · , xn is the union of the image of n paths γxi ,xi+1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ n
(and the value of i is taken (mod n)) such that the initial point of γt,t′ is t, the endpoint is t′ and
each path is a (1, l)-quasi-geodesic.
    From now on, we will not distinguish between paths (that are actually maps from an interval of
the real line to X) from their images in X, and we will assume that these paths are parametrized
by arc length. Notice that if X is a length space, we immediately get from Remark 4.6 that for any
x1 , · · · , xn ∈ X and any l > 0, there exists a (1, l)-quasi-geodesic n-gon with vertices x1 , · · · , xn .
We will denote one such n-gon by [x1 , · · · , xn ]ℓ and its sides by [xi , xi+1 ]l .
    If X is a δ-hyperbolic geodesic metric space, then every geodesic triangle in X is 2δ-thin,
that is, for every geodesic triangle in X, every side of the triangle is contained in the closed
2δ-neighbourhood of the union of the other two sides [DK18, Lemma 11.28].
    We recall now a similar result for quasi-geodesic quadrangles for later reference.
Lemma 4.10. [AAT23, Lemma 3.13] Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space, [p, q, r, s]ℓ a (1, ℓ)-quasi-
geodesic quadrangle with d(p, q) = d(r, s). Then, for any pair of points x ∈ [p, q]ℓ and y ∈ [r, s]ℓ
with d(p, x) = d(s, y) we have that
                            d(x, y) ≤ 5 max({d(s, p) , d(q, r)}) + 16δ + 38ℓ.
   We now state a result on quasi-geodesics on hyperbolic spaces, which is (a version of what is)
called in the literature stability of quasi-geodesics.
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                           15


Lemma 4.11. [Cou14, Corollary 2.6] Let l0 ≥ 0 be a positive real number. There exists a positive
number L = L(l0 , δ) depending only on δ and l0 such that the following holds. Let l ≤ l0 and
γ : I −→ X be an L-local (1, l)-quasi-geodesic.
   (1) The path γ is a (2, l)-quasi-geodesic.
   (2) For every t, t′ , s ∈ I, such that t ≤ s ≤ t′ , we have ⟨γ(t), γ(t′ )⟩γ(s) ≤ l/2 + 5δ.
   (3) For every x ∈ X, for every y, y ′ lying on γ, we have d(x, γ) ≤ ⟨y, y ′ ⟩x + l + 8δ.
   (4) The Hausdorff distance between γ and any other L-local (1, l)-quasi-geodesic joining the
       same endpoints, possibly in ∂X, is at most 2l + 5δ.
   Using a rescaling argument, one can see that the best value for the parameter L = L(l, δ)
satisfies the following property: for all l, δ ≥ 0 and λ > 0, L(λl, λδ) = λL(l, δ). With this in mind,
we can state the following definition.
Definition 4.12. Let L(l, δ) be the best value of the parameter L as provided by Lemma 4.11.
We denote by LS the smallest positive integer larger than 500 and such that L(105 δ, δ) ≤ LS δ.
  Notice from the discussion preceding Definition 4.12 that the value of LS does not depend on δ.

4.2.1. Quasi-convex and strongly quasi-convex subsets. We now define the concepts of a quasi-
convex subset of a metric space and of a strongly quasi-convex subset of a hyperbolic length space.
For a more comprehensive overview, see [Cou16b, Subsection 2.3].
   For a subset Y of a metric space X, we write Y α (respectively, Y +α ) for the open (respectively,
closed) α-neighbourhood of Y .
Definition 4.13. Let X be a metric space, α ≥ 0. A subset Y of X is α-quasi-convex if for every
pair of points y, y ′ ∈ Y and every point x ∈ X we have that
                                        d(x, Y ) ≤ ⟨y, y ′ ⟩x + α.
Remark 4.14. If X is a geodesic space, the usual definition of an α-quasi-convex subset Y is that
every geodesic joining two points of Y is contained in Y +α . If X is a δ-hyperbolic geodesic space,
a subset is α-quasi-convex in the usual sense if and only if it is (α + 4δ)-quasi-convex in the sense
of Definition 4.13.
Definition 4.15. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space, α ≥ 0. Let Y be a subset of X connected
by rectifiable paths. Denote by dY the length metric on Y induced by the restriction of the length
structure on X to Y (see [BBI22, Section 2] for the precise definition of a length structure). The
subset Y is said to be strongly quasi-convex if it is 2δ-quasi-convex and for every pair of points
y, y ′ ∈ Y we have that
                                    dY (y, y ′ ) ≤ dX (y, y ′ ) + 8δ.
  We now state some useful facts about quasi-convex subspaces of a hyperbolic space.
Lemma 4.16. [CDP06, Chapitre 10, Proposition 1.2] Let Y be an α-quasi-convex subset of a
δ-hyperbolic space X, and let A ≥ α. Then, we have that Y +A is 2δ-quasi-convex
Lemma 4.17. [Cou14, Lemma 2.13] Let Y1 , . . . , Ym be a collection of subsets of a δ-hyperbolic
space X such that Yj is αj -quasi-convex for j ∈ {1, . . . , m}. For all A ≥ 0 we have that

              diam(Y1+A ∩ · · · ∩ Ym+A ) ≤ diam(Y1+α1 +3δ ∩ · · · ∩ Ym+αm +3δ ) + 2A + 4δ.
Definition 4.18. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space, Y a subset of X. The hull of Y , denoted
by hull(Y ), is the union of all (1, δ)-quasi-geodesics joining two points of Y .
Lemma 4.19. [Cou14, Lemma 2.15] Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space, Y a subset of X. The
hull of Y is 6δ-quasi-convex.
16                                          MARCO AMELIO


4.2.2. The boundary at infinity. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic metric space, and x ∈ X. A sequence
(yn )n∈N is said to converge to infinity if ⟨ym , ym′ ⟩x tends to infinity as m and m′ tend to infinity.
Note that the hyperbolicity of the space gives that this does not depend on the choice of x. The
set S of sequences converging to infinity is endowed with a relation R ⊆ S 2 defined as follows: two
sequences (yn )n∈N and (zn )n∈N in S are related if
                                         lim ⟨yn , zn ⟩x = +∞.
                                        n→∞

Again, hyperbolicity gives that this is in fact an equivalence relation.
Definition 4.20. Let X be a hyperbolic metric space, S the set of sequences of points of X
converging to infinity. The boundary at infinity of X, denoted as ∂X, is the quotient of S by the
equivalence relation R.
  This definition does not depend on the choice of the base point x since X is hyperbolic. We will
write [(xm )m∈N ] for the equivalence class of the sequence (xm )m∈N . For a subset Y of X, we will
write ∂Y for the set of elements of ∂X that are limits of sequences of points of Y .
Remark 4.21. Notice that, in case X is a proper geodesic metric space, Definition 4.20 coincides
with the definition of the boundary using equivalence classes of geodesics, in the following sense:
write ∂ ′ X for the geodesic boundary, then, there is a homeomorphism h : X ∪ ∂ ′ X −→ X ∪ ∂X
extending the identity on X.
   By construction, if a group G acts by isometries on a hyperbolic space X (see Definition 4.22
below) this action extends in a natural way to an action on the boundary ∂X: for η = [(xm )m∈N ] ∈
∂X, put g · η = [(g · xm )m∈N ].

4.3. Group actions on hyperbolic spaces. Fix throughout this subsection a group G and a
δ-hyperbolic length space X. We begin by recalling the definition of an action by isometries of a
group G on a metric space (X, d).
Definition 4.22. Let G be a group and (X, d) be a metric space. We say that the group G acts
by isometries (or simply that it acts) on the metric space (X, d) if G acts on the underlying set X
in such a way that for all g ∈ G and for all x, y ∈ X we have that d(x, y) = d(g · x, g · y).
   Since all actions on metric spaces under consideration in this article will be actions by isometries,
for simplicity of notation we may omit mentioning explicitly the metric d and just talk about an
action of a group G on a metric space X.
   For a group G acting by isometries on a hyperbolic length space X, we denote by ∂G the set of
accumulation points of G · x in ∂X (note again that this definition does not depend on the choice of
x). Then either one (and hence every) orbit of G is bounded or ∂G is non-empty (see for example
[Cou16b, Proposition 3.5]).
   Recall that if g is an isometry of X, then g is of one of the following types:
      • elliptic, i.e. ∂⟨g⟩ is empty,
      • parabolic, i.e. ∂⟨g⟩ has exactly one element, or
      • loxodromic, i.e. ∂⟨g⟩ has exactly two elements.
   For a loxodromic isometry g, the two elements of ∂⟨g⟩ are
                          g −∞ = [(g −m · x)m∈N ] and g +∞ = [(g m · x)m∈N ].
Lemma 4.23. [CDP06, Chapitre 10, Proposition 6.6] The points g −∞ and g +∞ are the only points
of ∂X fixed by g.
     Conversely, we have the following well-known lemma.
Lemma 4.24. [Cou16b, Proposition 3.6] If ∂G has at least two points, then G contains a loxo-
dromic isometry.
               NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                         17


   Next we introduce two notions of translation lengths that can be used, among other things, to
give a characterization of loxodromic isometries.
Definition 4.25. Let g be an isometry of X. The translation length of g, denoted by [g]X (or
simply [g] if the space X is clear from the context) is
                                   [g]X = inf{d(x, g · x) : x ∈ X}.
The asymptotic translation length of g, denoted by [g]∞                 ∞
                                                        X (or simply [g] ) is
                                                   1
                                    [g]∞
                                       X = lim       d(x, g n · x).
                                            n→+∞ n

   Once again, notice that the definition of the asymptotic translation length does not depend on
the choice of x. These two concepts are related as follows:
Lemma 4.26. [CDP06, Chapitre 10, Propositions 6.3 and 6.4] The quantities [g] and [g]∞ satisfy
                                       [g]∞ ≤ [g] ≤ [g]∞ + 32δ,
and g is loxodromic if and only if [g]∞ > 0.
  We now state a result from [Cou14] for later reference.
Lemma 4.27. [Cou14, Lemma 2.26] Let x, x′ and y be three points of X, and let g be an isometry
of X. Then, we have that
                    d(y, g · y) ≤ max({d(x, g · x), d(x′ , g · x′ )}) + ⟨x, x′ ⟩y + 6δ.
4.3.1. The axis of an isometry. We now introduce the concepts of the axis of an isometry and
the cylinder of a loxodromic isometry, which will play an important role in the small cancellation
results introduced in Chapter 5. For a hyperbolic length space X and two distinct points ζ and η
of ∂X, we say that a path γ : R −→ X joins ζ and η if
                              {[(γ(−m))m∈N ], [(γ(m))m∈N ]} = {ζ, η}.
Definition 4.28. The axis of an isometry g of X, denoted as Ag , is the set
                                  {x ∈ X : d(x, g · x) < [g] + 8δ}.
  Note that the axis is defined for any isometry of G, not necessarily a loxodromic one.
Lemma 4.29. Let g be an isometry of X and x ∈ X. The following facts hold.
   • The axis Ag is 10δ-quasi-convex.
   • If d(x, g · x) ≤ [g] + A, then d(x, Ag ) ≤ A/2 + 3δ.
   We now introduce the concept of an l-nerve of an isometry g. It can be thought of as a ‘nice’
g-invariant bi-infinite quasi-geodesic that can be used to simplify some arguments (see for example
the proof of Proposition 4.52).
Definition 4.30. (see [Cou16b, Definition 3.3]) Let g be an isometry of X and l ≥ 0. We say that
a path γ : R −→ X is an l-nerve of g if there is some number T such that [g] ≤ T ≤ [g] + l, γ is a
T -local (1, l)-quasi-geodesic and for every t ∈ R we have that γ(t + T ) = g · γ(t). The parameter
T is called the fundamental length of γ.
  We collect some facts about l-nerves of an isometry that appeared in [Cou16b].
Lemma 4.31. Let g be an isometry of X. Then, for every l > 0, there exists an l-nerve of g.
Moreover, if [g] > LS δ and l ≤ 105 δ, then an l-nerve γ is (l + 8δ)-quasi-convex. Furthermore, γ
joins the accumulation points of ⟨g⟩ at ∂X.
Definition 4.32. Let g be a loxodromic isometry of X. We denote by Γg the union of all LS δ-
local (1, δ)-quasi-geodesics joining g −∞ and g +∞ . The cylinder of g, denoted as Yg is the open
20δ-neighbourhood of Γg .
18                                         MARCO AMELIO


   The next result relates the axis and the cylinder of a loxodromic isometry (see [Cou14, Lemmas
2.32 and 2.33] and [Cou16b, Lemma 3.13]).
Lemma 4.33. Let g be a loxodromic isometry of X, Ag the axis of g and Yg the cylinder of g.
     (1) Let Y be a g-invariant α-quasi-convex subset of X. Then, Yg is contained in the (α + 42δ)-
         neighbourhood of Y . In particular, Yg ⊆ A+52δ
                                                   g    .
     (2) Suppose that [g] > LS δ. Let l ≤ δ and γ be an LS δ-local (1, l)-quasi-geodesic joining the
         accumulation points of ⟨g⟩ in ∂X. Then, Ag is contained in the (l + 9δ)-neighbourhood of
         γ. In particular, Ag ⊆ Yg .
     (3) The cylinder Yg is a strongly quasi-convex subset of X.
  We now state Lemma 4.34, which, broadly speaking, says that a quasi-geodesic near the axis of
an isometry behaves almost like a nerve.
Lemma 4.34. [Cou14, Lemma 2.34] Let g be an isometry of X such that [g] > LS δ, let l ≤ δ and
let γ : [a, b] −→ X be a [g]-local (1, l)-quasi-geodesic contained in the C-neighborhood of Ag . Then
there exists ϵ ∈ {±1} such that for every s ∈ [a, b − [g]] we have
                               d(g ϵ · γ(s), γ(s + [g])) ≤ 4C + 4l + 88δ.
4.3.2. Elementary subgroups. Let G be a group acting by isometries on X and let H be a subgroup
of G. We say that H is elementary if ∂H has at most two points. Otherwise, we say it is non-
elementary. We say that an elementary subgroup H is
      • elliptic if its orbits are bounded (equivalently, if ∂H is empty),
      • parabolic if ∂H has exactly one point, or
      • loxodromic if ∂H has exactly two points.
   Notice that any finite subgroup of G is elliptic. We can associate to an elliptic subgroup a set of
‘almost fixed points’ in the sense of the following definition. For a subset S ⊆ G and a non-negative
real number r, write Fix(S, r) for the set {x ∈ X : d(x, g · x) ≤ r ∀g ∈ G}.
Definition 4.35. Let F be an elliptic subgroup of G. The characteristic set of F is Fix(F, 11δ),
that is,
                         CF = {x ∈ X : ∀g ∈ F, d(g · x, x) ≤ 11δ}.
Lemma 4.36. [Cou14, Proposition 2.36 and Corollaries 2.37 and 2.38] Let F be an elliptic sub-
group of G. The characteristic set CF is non-empty and 9δ-quasi-convex.
   Moreover, let Y be a non-empty F -invariant α-quasi-convex subset of X. Then, for every A ≥ α,
the A-neighbourhood of Y contains a point of CF .
4.3.3. Acylindrical group actions. We now recall the notion of an acylindrical group action on a
metric space (a weakening of the proper and cocompactness property in the usual definition of
a hyperbolic group that still allows for interesting consequences for groups admitting one such
action). This notion goes back to Sela’s paper [Sel97], where it was considered for groups acting on
trees. In the context of general metric spaces, the following definition was introduced by Bowditch
in [Bow08].
Definition 4.37. Let G be a group acting by isometries on a δ-hyperbolic metric space X. The
action is said to be acylindrical if for every ε ≥ 0 there exist M, L > 0 such that for every x, y ∈ X
with d(x, y) ≥ L we have:
                           |{g ∈ G : d(x, g · x) ≤ ε, d(y, g · y) ≤ ε}| ≤ M.
Remark 4.38. By [DGO17, Proposition 5.31] it suffices to check this condition for ε = 100δ. Even
though this result is stated for geodesic spaces, this also holds for length spaces (see [Cou21,
Proposition 5.6]).
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                            19


  The next two lemmas are the structural properties of an acylindrical action that will be the
most relevant in the proof of our main result. Lemma 4.40 is stated in [Cou16b] for the most
general case of a WPD action.
Lemma 4.39. [Osi16, Theorem 1.1] Let G be a group acting acylindrically by isometries on a
hyperbolic metric space. Then G has no parabolic subgroup.
Lemma 4.40. Let G be a group acting acylindrically on a hyperbolic length space X. Then, every
loxodromic subgroup H of G is contained in a unique maximal loxodromic subgroup of G, namely
the setwise stabilizer of the pair ∂H ⊂ ∂G, denoted by MG (H). Moreover, MG (H) (and thus H)
are virtually cyclic.
   Recall that an infinite virtually cyclic group H maps either onto Z or onto D∞ , with finite
kernel (which is the unique maximal normal finite subgroup of H). In the first case, we say that
H is of cyclic type, and in the second case we say that H is of dihedral type. An element of H
is called primitive if it maps to an element of Z (in the first case) or of D∞ (in the second case)
that has infinite order and does not admit a proper root. This terminology can be extended to
a loxodromic element h of G: the element h is called primitive if it is primitive as an element of
the virtually cyclic subgroup MG (⟨h⟩) (equivalently, h has minimal asymptotic translation length
among the loxodromic elements of MG (⟨h⟩)).
   The next lemma relates the cylinder of a loxodromic isometry with the characteristic subset of
finite subgroups normalized by this element.
Lemma 4.41. [Cou16b, Lemma 3.33] Let G be a group with a WPD action by isometries on a
hyperbolic length space X. Let g be a loxodromic element of G and H a subgroup fixing the set
{g ±∞ } pointwise. Let F be the maximal normal finite subgroup of H. Then, the cylinder Yg is
contained in the 51δ-neighbourhood of the characteristic subset CF .
4.4. Invariants of the group action. Fix now a group G acting acylindrically on a δ-hyperbolic
space X. In order to control the order of the torsion we are imposing in the quotients that we can
obtain with the small cancellation results in Section 5.2, we need to control certain invariants of the
action of the group in our hyperbolic space. The first of them, rinj (Q, X), already appeared in the
small cancellation assumptions in [Cou16b], [Cou21] and [AAT23]. For the sake of completeness,
we will reintroduce it. The other invariants, τ (G, X) and Ω(G, X), are modifications of ν(G, X)
and A(G, X) (respectively) from the aforementioned papers designed to deal with even torsion,
under the additional assumption that the even order elements of the group are in some sense ‘mild’,
captured by the notion of tameness, also introduced in this section.
Definition 4.42. Let Q be a subset of G. The injectivity radius of Q is
                                                    ∞
                            rinj (Q, X) = inf{[g]       : g ∈ Q, g loxodromic}.
Definition 4.43. The invariant ν(G, X) (or simply ν) is the smallest positive integer m satisfying
the following property: let g and h be two isometries of G with h loxodromic. If g, h−1 gh,...,
h−ν ghν generate an elliptic subgroup, then g and h generate an elementary subgroup of G.
   The proof of Lemma 6.12 in [Cou16b] yields the following bound for ν(G, X) for acylindrical
actions with positive injectivity radius.
Lemma 4.44. Assume the action of G on X is acylindrical and with positive injectivity radius.
Call L and M the parameters in the definition of an acylindrical action (Definition 4.37) corre-
sponding to ε = 97δ, and put M ′ as the smallest positive integer such that M ′ rinj (G, X) ≥ L.
Then, ν(G, X) ≤ M ′ + M .
  For g1 , . . . , gm ∈ G we put
                             A(g1 , . . . , gm ) = diam A+13δ ∩ . . . ∩ A+13δ
                                                                              
                                                         g1              gm     .
20                                          MARCO AMELIO


Definition 4.45. Assume the action of G on X has finite parameter ν = ν(G, X).
   We denote by A the set of (ν + 1)-tuples (g0 , . . . , gν ) such that g0 , . . . , gν generate a non-
elementary subgroup of G and for all j ∈ {0, . . . , ν} we have [gj ] ≤ LS δ. We define
                              A(G, X) =        sup          ({A (g0 , . . . , gν )}).
                                          (g0 ,...,gν )∈A

   We now introduce the concept of a tame action. The structural consequences that this assump-
tion has on the loxodromic subgroups of the action will be key when proving that the invariant ν
is well-behaved when developing our small cancellation theory in Section 5.
Definition 4.46. Let g be a loxodromic element of G, let E(g) = MG (⟨g⟩) be the maximal
loxodromic subgroup containing g and F (g) be the maximal normal finite subgroup of E(g). We
say that the action of G on X is tame if G contains no subgroup of order 4 and, for every loxodromic
element g ∈ G, F (g) has order at most 2.
Remark 4.47. Recall that, in virtue of the classification of loxodromic subgroups in acylindrical
actions (Proposition 4.40 and the subsequent paragraph), we get a classification of loxodromic
subgroups of G for a tame acylindrical action. More concretely, one such loxodromic subgroup H
will fall in one of these three cases:
    (1) H ∼  = Z;
    (2) H ∼  = C2 × Z; or
    (3) H ∼  = D∞ ;
  We now include for later reference an easy lemma for normalizers of finite elements of a tame
acylindrical action.
Lemma 4.48. Let G be a group with a tame acylindrical action on a hyperbolic space X and
F ≤ G be a subgroup of finite order ≥ 3. Then, NG (F ) is elliptic.
Proof. Notice that no loxodromic element of G can normalize F (since the action of G on X is
tame, the maximal normal finite subgroup of every loxodromic subgroup is of order at most 2).
Therefore, NG (F ) is neither non-elementary nor loxodromic, since in both cases it would, in fact,
contain a loxodromic element. Thus, NG (F ) must be elliptic.                                    □
   For the remainder of the section, we assume that the action of G on X is tame. For simplicity
of notation, we will now introduce a new parameter, τ (G, X), which will be key to control Ω(G, X)
(a modified version of the parameter A(G, X)).
Definition 4.49. The parameter τ is defined as τ (G, X) = max{ν(G, X), 3}.
Proposition 4.50. (Compare [Cou16b, Proposition 3.41]) Let G be a group acting acylindrically
on a hyperbolic space X. Suppose that the action is tame and that ν(G, X) is finite. Let g and h be
two elements of G with h loxodromic and let m ≥ τ be an integer such that g, h−1 gh, . . . , h−m ghm
generate an elementary subgroup of G. Then, g and h generate an elementary subgroup of G.
Proof. If g is trivial, then it is immediate that ⟨g, h⟩ is elementary, so we may assume g to be
non-trivial.
   Write H for the subgroup generated by g, h−1 gh, . . . , h−m ghm .
   Assume first that g is loxodromic. Then so is H, and thus all of H fixes the set of accumulation
points ∂H = {g ±∞ }. As a loxodromic element of H, h−1 gh also fixes pointwise ∂H. Therefore, g
fixes pointwise h · ∂H, but since g ±∞ are the only two points of ∂G fixed by G, then h stabilizes
∂H, so ⟨g, h⟩ is contained in the elementary subgroup of G stabilizing ∂H.
   Assume now that H (and thus in consequence also g) is elliptic. Then, since m ≥ ν(G, X), by
definition g and h generate an elementary subgroup.
   Finally, assume that H is loxodromic and that g is elliptic. Let p be the largest integer such that
g, . . . , h−p ghp generate an elliptic subgroup E. If p ≥ ν(G, X), then again as in the previous case
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                              21


we get that by definition g and h generate an elementary subgroup. Thus, we may assume that
p ≤ ν(G, X) − 1 ≤ m − 1. If for some k we have that g = h−k ghk , then g and hk centralize each
other, so g fixes the accumulation points of hk (which coincide with those of h) and thus again g
and h generate an elementary subgroup. Therefore, we can assume that the elements of the chain
are pairwise distinct. Now, E is an elliptic subgroup contained in a loxodromic subgroup, so it
follows from the classification of Remark 4.47 that in fact p = 0 ≤ m − 2. Now, E1 = ⟨E, h−1 Eh⟩
is a loxodromic subgroup with accumulation points ∂H, and the same holds for E2 = h−1 E1 h. A
loxodromic element of E2 fixes pointwise ∂H, and is necessarily an h-conjugate of a loxodromic
element h′ of E1 . But then, h′ has to fix pointwise ∂H (as an element of E1 ) and h · ∂H (as an
h-conjugate of an element of E2 ). Therefore, by Lemma 4.23, h fixes ∂H, and since so does g, then
⟨g, h⟩ is contained in the elementary subgroup of G stabilizing ∂H.                             □
  Now, we introduce parameter Ω(G, X) (a modification of parameter A(G, X)), the final one
needed to control the small cancellation assumptions.
Definition 4.51. Assume the action of G on X has finite parameter τ = τ (G, X).
   We denote by A′ the set of (τ + 1)-tuples (g0 , . . . , gτ ) such that g0 , . . . , gτ generate a non-
elementary subgroup of G and for all j ∈ {0, . . . , τ } we have [gj ] ≤ LS δ. We define
                              Ω(G, X) =           sup           ({A (g0 , . . . , gτ )}).
                                             (g0 ,...,gτ )∈A′

   The next two results are an adaptation to our context of Proposition 3.44 and Corollary 3.45
(respectively) of [Cou16b]. The statements and the proofs are almost identical, modulo putting
τ in place of ν and Ω(G, X) in place of A(G, X) when appropriate. However, for the sake of
completeness, we include proofs for both results.
Proposition 4.52. Let g and h be two elements of G generating a non-elementary subgroup.
   (1) If [g] ≤ LS δ, then A(g, h) ≤ τ [h] + Ω(G, X) + 154δ.
   (2) In general, we have that
                       A(g, h) ≤ [g] + [h] + τ max{[g], [h]} + Ω(G, X) + 680δ.
Proof. We will prove (1) by contradiction. To this purpose, suppose that A(g, h) > τ [h]+Ω(G, X)+
154δ, and let η ∈ (0, δ) be such that
                            A(g, h) > τ ([h] + η) + Ω(G, X) + 4η + 154δ.
If we had that [h] ≤ LS δ, then by definition of Ω(G, X) we would have that g and h generate an
elementary subgroup.
   Consider now γ : R −→ X an η-nerve of h and denote by T its fundamental length (see Definition
4.30). In particular, we have that T ≤ [h] + η. By Lemma 4.33, we see that Ah is contained in the
(η + 9δ)-neighbourhood of γ. Now, γ is 9δ-quasi-convex and Ag is 10δ-quasi-convex, so by Lemma
4.17 we get that
                     diam(A+13δ
                           g    ∩ γ +12δ ) > τ ([h] + η) + Ω(G, X) + 2η + 106δ.
Therefore, there exist x = γ(s) and x′ = γ(s′ ) two points in γ that are in the 25δ-neighbourhood
of Ag and such that
             dX (x, x′ ) > τ ([h] + η) + Ω(G, X) + 2η + 82δ ≥ τ T + Ω(G, X) + 2η + 82δ.
We may assume that s < s′ (after maybe replacing h by h−1 ). By Lemma 4.11, we get that
for all t ∈ [s, s′ ], ⟨x, x′ ⟩γ(t) ≤ η/2 + 5δ. Now, by Lemma 4.16, the 25δ-neighbourhood of Ag is
2δ-quasi-convex, and so γ(t) lies in the (η/2 + 32δ)-neighbourhood of Ag . In consequence, the
triangle inequality yields that
(1)                                  dX (γ(t), g · γ(t)) ≤ [g] + η + 72δ.
  Now, by the choice of s and s , there is some t ∈ [s, s′ ] such that dX (x, γ(t)) = Ω(G, X)+2η+82δ.
                                 ′

We write y = γ(t). We furthermore have that
22                                           MARCO AMELIO




(2)                        s′ − t ≥ dX (x′ , y) ≥ dX (x, x′ ) − dX (y, x) ≥ τ T.
  Let m ∈ {0, . . . , τ }. By the definition of an η-nerve, we get that hm · x = γ(s + mT ) and
hm · y = γ(t + mT ). By Equation (2), both s + mT and t + mT are in [s, s′ ], so by Equation (1),
               max{dX (ghm · x, hm · x), dX (ghm · y, hm · y)} ≤ [hm gh−m ] + η + 72δ.
   By Lemma 4.29, we see that x and y are in the (η/2 + 39δ)-neighbourhood of hm · Ag . Since
this holds for every non-negative integer m ≤ τ , x and y are two points in
                                    A+η/2+39δ
                                     g        ∩ · · · ∩ hτ · A+η/2+39δ
                                                              g        .
Now, Lemma 4.17 gives
                     A(g, hgh−1 , . . . , hτ gh−τ ) ≥ dX (x, y) − η − 82δ > Ω(G, X).
Furthermore, since the translation length is conjugation invariant, we obtain [hm gh−m ] ≤ LS δ, so
by the definition of Ω(G, X), the elements g, . . . , hτ gh−τ generate an elementary subgroup of G,
and thus, by the definition of τ (G, X), so do g and h.
  We now prove (2). By the previous point, we may assume that [g], [h] ≥ LS δ. Without loss of
generality, we may assume that [h] ≥ [g]. Assume towards a contradiction that
                              A(g, h) > [g] + (τ + 1)[h] + Ω(G, X) + 680δ.
Let η ∈ (0, δ) be such that
                         A(g, h) > [g] + (τ + 1)[h] + Ω(G, X) + 680δ + 15η.
Consider now γ an η-nerve of h and denote by T its fundamental length. As before, Ah is contained
in the (η + 9δ)-neighbourhood of γ, so
                 diam(A+13δ
                       g    ∩ γ +12δ ) > [g] + (τ + 1)[h] + Ω(G, X) + 13η + 632δ.
In particular, there exist x = γ(s) and x′ = γ(s′ ) in the 25δ-neighbourhood of Ag such that
                        dX (x, x′ ) > [g] + (τ + 1)[h] + Ω(G, X) + 13η + 608δ.
As in the previous case, we may assume that s ≤ s′ and we get that the restriction of γ to [s, s′ ]
is contained in the (η/2 + 32δ)-neighbourhood of Ag . By Lemma 4.34 we have (after possibly
replacing g by g −1 ) that for every t ∈ [s, s′ ], if t ≤ s′ − [g] then
                                   dX (g · γ(t), γ(t + [g])) ≤ 6η + 222δ.
Therefore, for every t ∈ [s, s ] with t ≤ s′ − [g] − T we obtain
                               ′

        dX (hg · γ(t), gh · γ(t)) ≤ dX (g · γ(t + T ), h · γ(t + [g])) + 6η + 222δ ≤ 12η + 444δ.
This means that the translation length of the element u = h−1 g −1 hg is less than LS δ. Furthermore,
for all t ∈ [s, s′ ], if t ≤ s′ − [g] − T , then γ(t) is in the (6η + 225δ)-neighbourhood of Au . Denote
by y = γ(t) a point such that dX (x′ , y) = [g] + T . We get that
                   dX (x, y) ≥ dX (x, x′ ) − d(x′ , y) > τ T + Ω(G, X) + 12η + 608δ,
and both x and y are in the (6η + 225δ)-neighbourhood of both Au and Ah . In consequence,
                     A(g, u) ≥ dX (x, y) − 12η − 454δ > τ [h] + Ω(G, X) + 154δ.
From point (1) we have that h and u generate an elementary subgroup of G, and thus so do h
and h′ = g −1 hg. Since h is loxodromic, the only fixed points on the boundary of the loxodromic
isometries h and h′ are {h±∞ }. Therefore, since h must fix g·{h±∞ }, then g must fix {h±∞ } as well.
In consequence, h and g generate an elementary subgroup, and we arrive at a contradiction.        □
Corollary 4.53. Let m ≤ τ (G, X) be an integer, let g0 , . . . , gm be elements of G generating a
non-elementary subgroup. Then,
                  A(g0 , . . . , gm ) ≤ (τ + 2) max{[g0 ], . . . , [gm ]} + Ω(G, X) + 680δ.
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                               23


Proof. If we have that [gi ] ≤ LS δ for all 0 ≤ i ≤ m, then by the definition of Ω(G, X) we get that
A(g0 , . . . , gm ) ≤ Ω(G, X). If there is some j such that [gj ] > LS δ, then gj is loxodromic. Now,
suppose that the corollary is false, and that the elements g0 , . . . , gm generate a non-elementary
subgroup and satisfy
                   A(g0 , . . . , gm ) > (τ + 2) max{[g0 ], . . . , [gm ]} + Ω(G, X) + 680δ.
Then, for all i ∈ {0, . . . , m}, Proposition 4.52 applied to gi and gj gives that these elements generate
an elementary subgroup, which is necessarily loxodromic (since it contains the loxodromic element
gj ). Therefore, for all i ∈ {0, . . . , m}, gi is in the maximal elementary subgroup containing gj , so
g0 , . . . , gm generate an elementary subgroup of G, and we arrive at a contradiction.                 □

Remark 4.54. If G acts on a δ-hyperbolic metric space X and λX is a rescaling of X (that is,
a metric space with the same underlying set and distances multiplied by λ), then λX is a λδ-
hyperbolic metric space endowed with an action of G. Moreover, the action of G on λX will be
tame if and only if so is the action of G on X, and the same holds for acylindricity. Furthermore,
the invariants satisfy rinj (Q, λX) = λrinj (Q, X) (for any subset Q of G), ν(G, λX) = ν(G, X),
τ (G, λX) = τ (G, X), A(G, λX) = λA(G, X) and Ω(G, λX) = λΩ(G, X).

                                   5. Small cancellation theory
    The goal of this section is to introduce, adapt and redevelop some of the small cancellation
methods from [Cou16b] and [Cou21]. As a remainder, the key difference between the three settings
is in the approach to control even torsion in the group under consideration. In [Cou16b], the groups
are assumed to contain no elements of even order, and the goal is to obtain odd order periodic
quotients of these groups. Meanwhile, in [Cou21], the situation is quite the opposite: the goal is to
obtain even order periodic exponents of groups (with the largest power of 2 dviding the exponent
arbitrarily large).
    In our case, we are in somewhat of an intermediate situation: the groups we want to consider
will indeed have involutions, but the exponents we wish to impose are odd. This imposes a priori
extra difficulties, which can be thought of, in a very simplified way, as coming from the following
fact: if a virtually cyclic subgroup E contains an even order element generating a subgroup that is
not in the maximal normal finite subgroup of E, then, in the quotient, (the image of) this element
may show up in the maximal normal finite subgroup of a virtually cyclic group E     b ′ , and we lose
                                                            ′
control over the action of the infinite order elements of E on this maximal normal finite subgroup.
                                                          b
As it was stated before, our approach to control the small cancellation parameters in the quotient
comes from the ‘mildness’ of the 2-torsion in our group, captured by the tameness of the actions
under consideration.

5.1. The Cone-Off Construction. In this subsection, we introduce the cone-off construction
over certain families of subspaces of a metric space, and explain how to extend the action of a group
on the metric space to an action on the cone-off. This construction will allow us to iteratively apply
the Small Cancellation Theorem introduced in Section 5.2. For the remainder of this section, we
fix the number ρ > 0.
Definition 5.1. Let X be a metric space. The cone over X of radius ρ, denoted by Zρ (X) (or,
if the value of ρ is clear by context, simply Z(X)), is the topological quotient of X × [0, ρ] by the
equivalence relation identifying all points of the form (x, 0) for x ∈ X.
   The equivalence class of (x, 0) is called the apex of the cone. The cone over X is endowed with
a metric characterized as follows (see [BH13, Chapter I.5, Proposition 5.9]). Let x = (y, r) and
x′ = (y ′ , r′ ) be two points of Z(X), then
                                                                              dX (y, y ′ )
                                                                                          
                           ′                 ′                 ′
        cosh(dZ(X) (x, x )) = cosh(r) cosh(r ) − sinh(r) sinh(r )cos min {π,               }   .
                                                                               sinh(ρ)
24                                           MARCO AMELIO


   In addition, if X is a length space, then so is Z(X). An action by isometries of a group G over
X naturally extends to an action by isometries on Z(X) as follows: for x = (y, r) in Z(X) and
g ∈ G, put g · x = (g · y, r). Note that in this case the apex of Z(X) is a global fixed point.
   We can compare the original metric space X with its cone Z(X) by defining a comparison map
ψ : X −→ Z(X) such that x 7−→ (x, ρ).
   Now we are ready to introduce the cone-off construction.
Definition 5.2. Let X be a hyperbolic length space, Y a collection of strongly quasi-convex
subsets of X. For Y ∈ Y, denote by dY the metric on Y induced by the length structure on Y
induced by the restriction of the length structure of X to Y . Write Z(Y ) for the cone over Y
(endowed with the distance dY ) of radius ρ and ψY for the corresponding comparison map.
   The cone-off of radius ρ over X relative to Y, denoted by Ẋρ (Y) (or simply Ẋ if ρ and Y are
clear by context) is the quotient of the disjoint union of X and the Z(Y ) for all Y ∈ Y by the
equivalence relation that, for all Y ∈ Y and y ∈ Y , identifies y with ψY (y) ∈ Z(Y ).
   Since the hyperbolic length space X embeds into the cone-off Ẋ, we will identify it with its image
under this embedding. Notice, however, that this embedding will not be, in general, isometric (or
even quasi-isometric). The cone-off is naturally endowed with a metric induced by the length
structure on Ẋ induced by the length structures on X and Z(Y ) for all Y ∈ Y (see [Cou16b,
Section 4.2]).
   The following lemma gives conditions under which the cone-off is hyperbolic, with certain control
over the hyperbolicity constant. For this purpose, we introduce a parameter that controls the
overlap between the elements of Y. We write
                                              diam Y1+5δ ∩ Y2+5δ .
                                                                   
                             ∆(Y) = sup
                                        Y1 ̸=Y2 ∈Y

     Denote by δ the hyperbolicity constant of the hyperbolic plane.
Lemma 5.3. [Cou14, Proposition 6.4] There exist positive numbers δ0 , ∆0 and ρ0 that satisfy the
following property. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space with δ ≤ δ0 . Let Y be a family of strongly
quasi-convex subsets of X with ∆(Y) ≤ ∆0 . Let ρ ≥ ρ0 . Then, the cone-off Ẋρ (Y) is δ̇-hyperbolic,
with δ̇ = 900δ.
   For the remainder of this section, we fix a length space X and a family Y as in Definition 5.2.
   Lemmas 5.5 and 5.6 provide some insight on how the metric on Ẋ relates to the metric on
X and to the cones Z(Y ). In order to state the first of these results, we introduce the map
µ : R≥0 −→ R≥0 characterized by
                                                                          
                                                                      t
                  cosh(µ(t)) = cosh2 (ρ) − sinh2 (ρ)cos min {π,            }
                                                                   sinh(ρ)
for all t ≥ 0. The map µ has the following properties that will be used later.
Lemma 5.4. [Cou16b, Proposition 4.2] The map µ is continuous, concave (down) and non-
decreasing. Furthermore, the following properties hold.
                                                        
                                       1            1
      • For all t ≥ 0, we have: t −         1+              t3 ≤ µ(t) ≤ t, and
                                       24       sinh2 (ρ)      
                                                           µ(t)
      • for all t ∈ [0, π sinh(ρ)], we have: t ≤ π sinh           .
                                                             2
Lemma 5.5. [Cou14, Lemma 5.8] For every x, x′ ∈ X we have:
                                µ(dX (x, x′ )) ≤ dẊ (x, x′ ) ≤ dX (x, x′ ).
Lemma 5.6. [Cou14, Lemma 5.7] Let v be the apex of a cone Z(Y ) for some Y ∈ Y. Then,
BẊ (v, ρ) = Z(Y )\Y .
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                             25


5.1.1. Group action on the cone-off. For the remainder of this section, we assume ρ ≥ max({ρ0 , 1010 δ, 1020 LS δ}),
and we fix a real number δ ≤ δ0 , a δ-hyperbolic length space X, a family Y of strongly quasi-convex
subsets of X with ∆(Y) ≤ ∆0 , where ρ0 , δ0 and ∆0 are the parameters provided by Lemma 5.3.
   Consider a group G acting by isometries on X and acting on the family Y by left translation,
that is, such that g · Y ∈ Y for all Y ∈ Y. We can extend this action by homogeneity to an action
of G on the cone-off as follows. Let Y ∈ Y and x = (y, r) be a point on the cone Z(Y ). For g ∈ G
we define g · x = g · (y, r) = (g · y, r) ∈ Z(g · Y ). It follows from the definition of the metric of Ẋ
that this action is an isometry on Ẋ.
   The next result uses techniques from [Cou16b, Proposition 4.10] for WPD actions on hyperbolic
length spaces, and from [DGO17, Proposition 5.40] for acylindrical actions on hyperbolic geodesic
spaces.
Lemma 5.7. If the action of G on X is acylindrical, then so is the induced action on Ẋ.
Proof. We will apply Remark 4.38. The action of G on X is acylindrical, therefore, there are
positive numbers L′ and M ′ such that, for all x, x′ ∈ X, if dX (x, x′ ) is at least L′ , then there are
at most M ′ elements moving x and x′ less than π sinh(300δ̇). We will show that we can take M ′
and L′ + 4ρ as the parameters M and L of Remark 4.38.
    Now, let a, b ∈ Ẋ be such that d(a, b) ≥ L′ + 4ρ, and consider a (1, δ̇)-quasi-geodesic segment
[a, b]δ̇ . If an element g ∈ G moves both a and b by less than 100δ̇, we can apply Lemma 4.10 to
conclude that any point in this quasi-geodesic segment is moved by less than 600δ̇ by g. Further-
more, since by Lemma 5.6 the diameter of the ball around an apex of the cone is at most 2ρ, this
quasi-geodesic must contain points of X at a distance of at least L′ . Therefore, we may assume
that a, b ∈ X and that we need to bound the number of elements of G moving a and b by at most
600δ̇. By Lemma 5.5, we have that
                                µ(dX (a, g · a)) ≤ dẊ (a, g · a) ≤ 600δ̇.
By the choice of ρ, we have that µ(dX (a, g · a)) < π sinh(ρ), and therefore Lemma 5.4 gives
                                     dX (a, g · a) ≤ π sinh(300δ̇).
Similarly, we obtain that
                                   dX (b, g · b) ≤ π sinh(300δ̇),
so the number of elements g satisfying this property is, indeed, at most M ′ .                        □
5.2. The small cancellation theorem. In this subsection, we will state a small cancellation
theorem, following closely the expositions in [Cou16b] and [AAT23] for a WPD action of a group
without 2-torsion, and in [Cou21] for the more general setting of a gentle action. Throughout this
section, fix a group G with a non-elementary acylindrical action on a δ-hyperbolic length space
X, and fix a parameter ρ ∈ R (to be thought of as a very large distance). Consider a family Q of
pairs (H, Y ), where H is a subgroup of G and Y an H-invariant strongly quasi-convex subset of
X with the following properties:
      • there exists an odd integer n′ ≥ 100 such that for all subgroups H there is a primitive
         loxodromic element h′ ∈ G such that H = ⟨h′n ⟩ for some odd n ≥ n′ ;
      • Y is the cylinder Yh of h = h′n ; and
      • the group G acts on the family Q via g · (H, Y ) = (gHg −1 , g · Y ) for g ∈ G and (H, Y ) ∈ Q.
   Let K be the normal subgroup generated by the family Q = {H : (H, Y ) ∈ Q}. The aim is to
understand the quotient G  b = G/K, and for that purpose we will define a metric space X    b on which
Gb acts. We will do that in two steps.
   First, notice that, since the family Y = {Y : (H, Y ) ∈ Q} is composed of strongly quasi-convex
subsets of X (see Lemma 4.33), we can construct the cone-off Ẋ of radius ρ of X relative to this
family (as defined in Subsection 5.1). The group G has a natural action by isometries on this space
induced by the action of G on X.
26                                          MARCO AMELIO


   We now set the space X    b = Ẋ/K. This will be a metric space on which G     b naturally acts by
isometries (see [Cou16b, Section 5.1]). We write ζ : Ẋ −→ X for the projection map and v(Q) for
                                                               b
the subset of Ẋ consisting of the apices of the cones Z(Y ) for (H, Y ) ∈ Q. Let vb(Q) denote its
          b We will also call the elements of vb(Q) apices. For an element g ∈ G (respectively,
image in X.
x ∈ Ẋ), we will write gb (respectively, x
                                         b) for its image in G
                                                             b (respectively, X).
                                                                              b
   In order to get some desired properties of the group G, the space X, and of the action of G
                                                            b            b                       b on
X, we need the action of G on X to satisfy some small cancellation conditions. These conditions
 b
involve two parameters ∆(Q) and T (Q) associated to this family Q, which will play the role of
the length of the largest piece and the length of the shortest relator in the usual small cancellation
theory, defined as:
                   ∆(Q) = sup({diam(Y1+5δ ∩ Y2+5δ )}) : (H1 , Y1 ) ̸= (H2 , Y2 ) ∈ Q})
and
                            T (Q) = inf({[h] : h ∈ H , (H, Y ) ∈ Q}).
   The following statement appears as Theorem 4.17 in [Cou21], and is a combination of a number
of results in [Cou14].
Theorem 5.8. The Small Cancellation Theorem. There exist positive constants ρ0 , δ0 , δ1 and
∆0 that are independent of X, G and Q such that for δ ≤ δ0 , ρ ≥ ρ0 , ∆(Q) ≤ ∆0 and T (Q) ≥
10π sinh(ρ) the following statements hold.
      (1) The cone-off Ẋ is δ̇ hyperbolic with δ̇ ≤ δ1 .
      (2) The quotient space X b is δ-hyperbolic
                                    b             with δb ≤ δ1 .
      (3) Let (H, Y ) ∈ Q and let vb be the image in X b of the apex v of Z(Y ). The projection G ↠ Gb
          induces an isomorphism from Stab(Y )/H onto the image of Stab(Y ), which coincides with
          Stab(bv ).
      (4) Let (H, Y ) ∈ Q and let vb be the image in X    b of the apex v of Z(Y ). The projection map
          ζ : Ẋ −→ X induces an isometry from B(v, ρ/2)/H onto BXb (b
                      b                                                     v , ρ/2).
      (5) For every number r ∈ (0, ρ/20] and every x ∈ Ẋ, if there is no v ∈ v(Q) such that
          dẊ (x, v) < 2r, then the projection ζ : Ẋ −→ X   b induces an isometry from B (x, r) onto
                                                                                           Ẋ
          BXb (b
               x, r).
      (6) Let g ∈ K\{1}, let x ∈ Ẋ and let r = dẊ (x, v(Q)). Then, dẊ (x, g · x) ≥ min{2r, ρ/5}. In
          particular, K acts freely on Ẋ\v(Q).
   Notice that the constants δ0 and ∆0 can be chosen arbitrarily small, while the constant ρ0 can
be chosen arbitrarily large. Throughout this article, we will need to ensure that many inequalities
involving these parameters are satisfied, and to this purpose we will pick the values for these
constants very generously. Following [Cou21], we assume ρ0 > 1020 LS δ1 and δ0 , ∆0 < 10−10 δ1 .
These choices are such that
                                max{δ0 , ∆0 } ≪ δ1 ≪ ρ0 ≪ π sinh(ρ0 ).
For the remainder of this section, we assume that X, G and Q satisfy the assumptions of Theorem
5.8 (in addition to the assumptions introduced in the preceding subsection), and we will write G  b
and X for the quotient group and the quotient space (respectively) as described above. Notice
      b
that, up to increasing the constants δ̇ and δ,
                                            b we may take δ̇ = δb = δ1 . We will adopt this point of
view, but we will keep the distinct notation so as to emphasize the space under consideration.
Remark 5.9. Notice that the value of the parameter ∆(Q) is the value of the parameter ∆(Y)
introduced in Subsection 5.1 for the family Y = {Y : (H, Y ) ∈ Q} with one caveat: we are now
considering distinct pairs (H, Y ) and (H ′ , Y ′ ), and in principle the same subset Y may appear
in two distinct pairs. However, our assumptions imply that this cannot happen. If (H, Y ) and
(H ′ , Y ′ ) are two distinct pairs in Q, we must have Y ̸= Y ′ : ∆(Q) is finite and the cylinder of a
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                             27


loxodromic element is unbounded. In particular, this gives that, for (H, Y ) ∈ Q, the subgroup H
is normal in Stab(Y ), and point (3) of Lemma 5.8 actually makes sense.
Remark 5.10. Notice that, by construction, the distance between any two distinct apices vb1 and
vb2 of vb(Q) is at least 2ρ.
5.3. Apex stabilizers in the quotient space. In this subsection, we introduce some terminology
and study some basic properties of the subgroups of the quotient group G  b fixing some apex vb ∈
vb(Q).
   Recall that, since the action of G on X is acylindrical, every loxodromic subgroup of G is
virtually cyclic (Lemma 4.40). Thus, if E is a loxodromic subgroup of G, it has a maximal normal
finite subgroup F such that either E ∼   = F ⋊ Z or E/F ∼
                                                        = D∞ .
   Now, by construction, the pairs (H, Y ) ∈ Q consist of a cyclic group H = ⟨hn ⟩ for a primitive
loxodromic element h and the corresponding cylinder Y = Yhn . For notational clarity, we may
write nh for the integer such that H = ⟨hn ⟩ for one such pair in Q. We have that Stab(Y ) is the
maximal loxodromic subgroup containing H. Therefore, by Theorem 5.8 (3), we get the following
classification result for apex stabilizers.
Lemma 5.11. Let vb be an apex in vb(Q). Let (H, Y ) ∈ Q be such that Stab(Y ) is a preimage
of Stab(b
        v ) and let F be the maximal normal finite subgroup of Stab(Y ). Then, the projection
map G ↠ G   b induces an isomorphism from F onto its image Fb, and we have that Stab(b
                                                                                     v )/Fb is
isomorphic to:
    (1) Cnh (if and only if Stab(Y )/F ∼
                                       = Z), or
    (2) Dnh (if and only if Stab(Y )/F ∼
                                       = D∞ ).
   In virtue of the classification provided by Lemma 5.11, we introduce the following terminology,
following [Cou21].
Definition 5.12. Let vb ∈ vb(Q), let (H, Y ) ∈ Q be such that vb is the image of the apex corre-
sponding to the cone Z(Y ). Let F be the maximal normal finite subgroup of Stab(Y ) and Fb its
          b Let gb ∈ Stab(b
image in G.                  v ). We say that gb is:
      • locally trivial at vb if gb ∈ Fb.
      • a reflection at vb if its image under the quotient map Stab(b
                                                                    v ) ↠ Stab(b
                                                                               v )/Fb is a reflection
        of Dn .
      • a strict rotation otherwise.
Similarly, for a subset Sb ⊆ Stab(b   v ), we will say that Sb is:
     • locally trivial at vb if every element of Sb is locally trivial at vb.
     • a reflection group (respectively, a strict reflection group) at vb if it is a subgroup and its
       image under the quotient map Stab(b     v ) ↠ Stab(b  v )/Fb is contained in a subgroup generated
       by a reflection of Dn (respectively, and it is not locally trivial).
Remark 5.13. Let us now expand the explanation (already hinted at the beginning of this section) of
the main differences between the small cancellation setting for this article and the one in [Cou21].
The aim of that article is to construct periodic groups of (large enough) even exponent, where
arbitrarily large powers of 2 can divide the exponent. For that purpose, the integers nh defined
above cannot be assumed to be odd (as is our case).
   This nuance has very important consequences for the algebraic structure of the groups being
constructed. The periodic quotients will be obtained by iterating the application of (a variant of)
Theorem 5.8, and then taking the limit of this construction. Thus, for example, if the initializing
group G is torsion-free and the exponent nh is odd and has the same value n for every pair, then
every finite subgroup of the limit quotient group (and of every step of the induction process) will
be cyclic of order dividing n. If nh is taken to be the same integer n for every pair, but n is even,
28                                                MARCO AMELIO


the limit quotient group may have arbitrarily long chains of subgroups Dn × Dm × · · · × Dm , where
m is the largest power of 2 dividing n (see, for example, [Iva94] and [Lys96]).
   In order to deal with the complicated algebraic structure of finite subgroups, in [Cou21] the
author makes an extra assumption: that whenever for some vb ∈ vb(Q) the subgroup Stab(b       v )/Fb has
even torsion, then Stab(bv ) contains a central half-turn (an involution that is a strict rotation at vb
and that is central in Stab(bv )). One such element cannot exist if n is odd.
   In view of the previous remark, some of the structural results from [Cou21] do not directly
adapt to the setting of this article. Throughout the rest of the present section, we will retrieve
results from [Cou16b] that are needed later in this article, providing no proof here whenever the
proof given in that article works without any further change in our setting. We will also prove
different versions of the results from [Cou21] whenever necessary, as well as new results specific to
our setting.
   We finish this subsection with a result on the structure of (almost) fixed-point sets of elements
of Stab(bv ).

Lemma 5.14. (see [Cou21, Proposition 4.13]) Let vb ∈ vb(Q) be an apex of X.
                                                                         b
     (1) If gb ∈ Stab(b v ) is locally trivial at vb, then BXb (bv , ρ) is contained in Fix(b
                                                                                            g , δ).
                                                                                                b
     (2) If A is a reflection group at vb, there is a point x
              b                                                    b ∈ Fix(A, δ) such that dXb (b
                                                                             b b                  x, vb) > ρ/2.
     (3) If gb is a strict rotation at vb, then there is k ∈ Z such that for every x    b ∈ BXb (bv , ρ/3) we have
         that dXb (bgk · x  b) ≥ 2dXb (b
                         b, x           x, vb) − δ.
                                                 b In particular, for every r ∈ [δ, b ρ/10] the set Fix(b  g k , r) is
         non-empty and contained in BXb (b         v , r). In consequence, vb is the unique apex of vb(Q) fixed
         by gb.
Proof. The proof of point (i) of Proposition 4.13 in [Cou21] adapts to this setting without any
further change to prove part (1). Meanwhile, the proof of point (iii) of Proposition 4.13 in [Cou21]
yields unchanged a proof of part (3) (even though this result is not explicitly stated in the claim
of the aforementioned result).
   For part (2): let (H, Y ) ∈ Q be such that vb is the image of the apex of the cone Z(Y ). The
subgroup A b is the image of an elliptic subgroup A of H. Thus, since Y is an A-invariant and
strongly quasi-convex subset of X, by Lemma 4.36 and the triangle inequality, Y contains a point
x ∈ Fix(A, 100δ). Then, since the quotient map ζ : X −→ X   b shortens the distances, A b moves the
image xb of x in X by less than δ, and by Theorem 5.8 (4) this point is at distance greater than
                  b              b
ρ/2.                                                                                              □

Remark 5.15. Lemma 5.14 has the following consequence: if an element is a strict rotation at an
apex vb, then it cannot stabilize any other apex. In consequence, we may say that an element is a
strict rotation without reference to any specific apex.
5.4. Lifting properties. The purpose of this subsection is studying how certain ‘pictures’ in the
quotient space Xb can be lifted to the cone-off space Ẋ. We begin with three results whose proofs
can be directly adapted from the corresponding ones in [Cou21].
   For the next result, Lemma 5.16, the proof of [Cou21, Lemma 4.17] works verbatim.
Lemma 5.16. Let Z be a subset of Ẋ such that for every pair of points z, z ′ of Z and every apex
v ∈ v(Q) we have that ⟨z, z ′ ⟩v > 13δ̇. Then, the map ζ : Ẋ −→ X           b induces an isometry from Z
onto its image Z. Furthermore, the following properties hold.
                 b
   (1) Let gb ∈ G b be such that there exist points z1 , z2 in Z such that their images zb1 and zb2 in Z     b
        satisfy gb · zb1 = zb2 . Then, there exists a unique preimage g of G     b in G such that g · z1 = z2 .
        Moreover, this element g ∈ G is such that for every pair of points z, z ′ in Z we have that
        g · z = z ′ if and only if their images zb, zb′ in Z
                                                           b satisfy gb · zb = zb′ .
   (2) The projection map G ↠ G induces an isomorphism from Stab(Z) onto its image Stab(Z).
                                       b                                                                   b
                  NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                     29


    Lemma 5.17 appears in [Cou21] as Lemma 4.18, and once again the proof of that result works
without any further change in our setting.
Lemma 5.17. Let Zb be a subset of X           b such that for every pair of points zb1 , zb2 of Z
                                                                                                b and every apex
vb ∈ vb(Q) we have that ⟨b   z1 , zb2 ⟩vb > 13δ. Let zb be a point of Z and z a preimage of zb in Ẋ. Then,
                                              b                       b
there exists a unique subset Z of Ẋ containing z and such that the projection map ζ : Ẋ −→ X                 b
induces an isometry from Z onto Z.         b In particular, for every z1 , z2 in Z and v ∈ v(Q), if we denote
by zb1 , zb2 and vb their respective images in X    b we have that ⟨z1 , z2 ⟩v ≥ ⟨b
                                                                                  z1 , zb2 ⟩vb.
Remark 5.18. We collect some immediate consequences and observations from Lemmas 5.16 and
5.17.
    (1) Lemma 5.16 applies in particular to a subset Z of Ẋ that is α-quasi-convex and such that,
        for every v ∈ v(Q), dẊ (v, Z) > α + 13δ̇.
    (2) Lemma 5.17 applies in particular to a subset Zb of X  b that is α-quasi-convex and such that,
        for every vb ∈ vb(Q), dXb (b
                                   v , Z)
                                       b > α + 13δ.
                                                  b
    (3) Let Z be a subset of X satisfying the hypotheses of Lemma 5.17. Then, we can apply
             b                    b
        Lemma 5.16 to any lift Z of Z      b in Ẋ (as provided by the aforementioned lemma). In
        particular, the quotient map G ↠ G    b induces an isomorphism from Stab(Z) onto its image,
        which coincides with Stab(Z).   b
   Lemmas 5.16 and 5.17 allow us to project and to lift figures that stay far away from the apices
of Ẋ and X
          b respectively. Lemmas 5.19 and 5.20 deal with the case where we have quasi-geodesics
that come close to some apex.
   Lemma 5.19 appears in [Cou21] as Proposition 4.19, and the proof of the result in that article
works without any further change in our setting.
Lemma 5.19. Let x and y be two points of X, let γ : [a, b] −→ Ẋ be a path from x to y such that
its image γ  b : [a, b] −→ X      b on Xb is a (1, δ)-quasi-geodesic
                                                     b                  from the image x  b of x to the image yb of
y. Let S be a subset of G and denote by S its image on G. Assume that for every g ∈ S we have
                                                        b               b
that dẊ (x, g · x) ≤ ρ/100 and dXb (b       y , gb · yb) ≤ ρ/100. In addition, we assume that for every apex
vb ∈ vb(Q) such that ⟨b      x, yb⟩vb ≤ ρ/4, the set Sb ∩ Stab(b  v ) is locally trivial at vb. Then, we have that
dẊ (y, g · y) = dXb (by , gb · yb) for every g ∈ S.
Lemma 5.20. Let x and y be two points of X and let S be a subset of G. Write Sb for the image
         b We assume that d (x, g · x) ≤ ρ/100 and d b (b
of S in G.                                                         b · yb) ≤ ρ/100 for every g ∈ S. We
                                 Ẋ                         X y, g
further assume that for every apex vb ∈ vb(Q) the set S ∩ Stab(b
                                                         b          v ) is contained in a reflection group
at vb. Then, one of the following holds.
       • The set Sb lies in a strict reflection group at some apex vb ∈ vb(Q).
       • There exists u ∈ K such that dẊ (u · y, gu · y) = dXb (b
                                                                 y , gb · yb) for every g ∈ S.
Proof. We first assume that for every apex vb ∈ vb(Q) such that ⟨b      x, yb⟩vb ≤ ρ/4, the set Sb ∩ Stab(bv)
                                  b be a positive number, and let u ∈ K be such that d (x, u · y) ≤
is locally trivial at vb. Let ε < δ/2                                                           Ẋ
dXb (b
     x, yb)+ε (this element exists by the definition of the distance in X).b Take a (1, ε)-quasi-geodesic
γ from x to u · y. The image γ   b of γ in Xb is, by construction, a (1, 2ε)-quasi-geodesic from x    b to yb.
In consequence, Lemma 5.19 applies (with the element u · y in place of y) and we are in the second
case of the claim of this lemma.
    Now, assume that there is some apex vb ∈ vb(Q) such that ⟨b     x, yb⟩vb ≤ ρ/4 and such that Sb is not
locally trivial at vb. Every element gb ∈ Sb moves both x b and yb by at most ρ/100, so by Lemma 4.27
we have that gb moves vb by less than ρ. Thus, since the distance between any two apices is bounded
from below by ρ, we get that all of Sb must fix vb. By assumption, Sb ∩ Stab(b         v ) is contained in a
reflection group at vb, and also by the assumption of this paragraph, this must be a strict reflection
group. Therefore, we are in the first case of the claim of this lemma.                                      □
30                                            MARCO AMELIO


5.5. The action of the quotient group. In this subsection, we begin a systematic study of the
properties of the action of G
                            b on X.
                                 b More concretely, we will prove that this action is non-elementary
and (with one mild extra assumption) acylindrical.
   The next result is [AAT23, Lemma 4.21]. In fact, the proof is identical to that of the aforemen-
tioned result, with the exception that some of the constants involved have been modified. For the
sake of completeness, we include a proof here.
Lemma 5.21. Assume that there is some positive integer m such that for every pair (H, Y ) ∈ Q
we have that |Stab(Y )/H| ≤ m. Then, the action of G
                                                   b on X
                                                        b is acylindrical.
Proof. We will apply Remark 4.38. Since the action of G on the cone-off space is acylindrical, there
are positive integers L′ and M ′ such that for every pair of points x, x′ of Ẋ, if dẊ (x, x′ ) ≥ L′ , then
the number of elements of G moving both x and x′ at most 100δb is at most M ′ . We will prove
that we can take M = max{M ′ , m} and L = L′ to satisfy the hypotheses of Remark 4.38.
   Let now xb and x  b′ be two points of X
                                         b at a distance of at least L′ . Let Zb be the hull of {b       b′ }.
                                                                                                      x, x
By Lemma 4.19 this is a 6δ-quasi-convex subset of X. Moreover, if an element gb moves both x
                              b                           b                                                 b
and xb′ by at most 100δ, b then by Lemma 4.10 it moves every element of Zb by at most 600δ.        b
   Suppose now that there is an apex vb ∈ vb(Q) at distance at most ρ/3 of Z.     b Then, an element gb
as in the preceding paragraph will move vb by at most 2ρ/3 + 600δ < ρ. Thus, since the distance
                                                                         b
between any two distinct apices is at least ρ, such a gb fixes vb, and by assumption there are at most
m such elements.
   Assume now that there is no apex vb ∈ vb(Q) at distance at most ρ/3 of Z.    b Lemma 4.16 gives that
                                                         +600δ
the closed 600δ-neighbourhood     of Z
                                     b (denoted by Zb          ) is 2δ-quasi-convex.  Notice that there is
                 b                                            b      b
                                                  +600δ
no apex vb ∈ vb(Q) at distance at most ρ/4 of Z         . Now, by construction, gb · X lies Zb+600δ . Thus,
                                                b     b                              b             b

we can apply Lemmas 5.16 and 5.17 to get that there is a subset Z + of Ẋ such that the projection
map ζ : Ẋ −→ X    b induces an isometry from Z + onto Zb+600δb. In particular, the preimages x and
 ′
x of x      b are at distance at least L′ . Moreover, we get a preimage g of gb such that it moves x
      b and x  ′

and x′ by at most 100δ.  b By the choice of L′ , there are at most M distinct elements of G with this
property, from where the desired conclusion follows.                                                        □
   For the remainder of this section, we will assume that the family Q satisfies the assumption of
Lemma 5.21, so that the action of G b on X b is acylindrical.
   The following result follows from Lemma 4.23 and Proposition 4.24 in [Cou21] (both of which
adapt without any further change to our setting) together with our choice of n′ at the beginning
of Subsection 5.2.
Lemma 5.22. The action of G    b on X b is non-elementary.
5.6. Elementary subgroups of G.    b In this subsection, we will study the elementary subgroups
of G for their action on X, with some results on their algebraic structure and lifting properties.
    b                     b
   Notice that, since the map X −→ X   b shortens the distances between the images of points of
X, then the projection G −→ G is such that the image E
                                b                         b of an elementary subgroup E of G is
elementary. However, it may happen that the case in the classification introduced in Subsection
4.3 does not coincide for an elementary subgroup and its image: for example, if (H, Y ) ∈ Q, then
the image of the loxodromic subgroup Stab(Y ) fixes an apex, and thus, it is elliptic.
   To the purpose of understanding which elementary subgroups of G   b come from elementary sub-
groups of G of the same nature, we introduce, following the terminology in [Cou21], the notion of
a lift of an elementary subgroup of G.
                                    b
Definition 5.23. Let E b be an elliptic (respectively, loxodromic) subgroup of Gb (by the action on
X). We say that E lifts if there is an elliptic (respectively, loxodromic) subgroup E of G (by its
 b               b
action on X) such that the quotient map G ↠ G    b induces an isomorphism from E onto E. b We call
one such subgroup E a lift of E.
                              b
                 NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                               31


  The next lemma appears in [Cou21] as Lemma 4.26, and the proof exhibited in that article
works without any changes in our setting.
Lemma 5.24. Let S be a subset of G such that Fix(S, ρ/10) is non-empty. Then, the quotient
map G ↠ G  b is one-to-one when restricted to S. In particular, if E is an elliptic subgroup of G,
then the quotient map induces an isomorphism from E onto its image.
   The next lemma is a first step towards understanding which elliptic subgroups of G
                                                                                    b can lift.

Lemma 5.25. Let E be an elliptic subgroup of G (for its action on X), and let E
                                                                              b be its image in
G.      b does not contain a strict rotation at any apex vb ∈ vb(Q).
b Then, E

Proof. Let E be an elliptic subgroup of G. Assume towards a contradiction that there is some
g ∈ E such that its image gb is a strict rotation at some apex vb ∈ vb(Q). By Lemma 5.14, there is
some integer k such that Fix(b   g k , δ)
                                       b is contained in B b (b
                                                          X v , δ). On the other hand, since E is elliptic,
                                                                b
so is the element g k , and thus by Lemma 4.36 there is some x ∈ X such that dX (x, g k · x) ≤ 11δ.
Since the projection map ζ : X −→ X        b shortens distances, then, if we denote by xb the image of x
                              k
on X, we get that dXb (b
    b                    x, gb · x
                                 b) ≤ δ. Now, from Lemma 5.14 (3) we get a contradiction.
                                         b                                                               □

   The next results allow us to compare distinct lifts of a given elliptic subgroup of G.
                                                                                       b

Lemma 5.26. (Compare [Cou21, Proposition 4.27]) Let E be an elliptic subgroup of G (for its
action on X) and S1 be a subset of E. Denote by Sb1 its image in G.             h ∈ G.
                                                                          b Let b   b Let S2 be a
              −1 b b
preimage of h S1 h such that Fix(S2 , ρ/100) is non-empty. Then, one of the following holds.
            b
      • The set Sb1 lies in a strict reflection group at some apex vb ∈ vb(Q).
      • There exists a preimage h of b    h in G such that, for every g ∈ S1 , h−1 gh is the unique
                       −1
        preimage of bh gbb h in S2 .
Proof. Since E is elliptic and S1 is a subset of E, we have that Fix(S1 , ρ/100) is non-empty. Fix
now two points x1 , x2 ∈ X such that they lie in Fix(S1 , ρ/100) and Fix(S2 , ρ/100) respectively,
and denote by x   b1 and x
                         b2 their respective images in X. b Notice that both x  b1 and bh−1 · x
                                                                                              b2 lie in
Fix(Sb1 , ρ/100).
    By Lemma 5.25 we have that Sb1 ∩ Stab(b    v ) is contained in a reflection group at vb for every
vb ∈ vb(Q).
    Assume now that Sb1 does not lie in a strict reflection group at any apex vb ∈ vb(Q). Let h′ be an
arbitrary preimage of b h−1 . Lemma 5.20 applied to S = S1 , x = x1 and y = h′ · x2 gives that there
exists some u ∈ K such that for all g ∈ S1 we have
                             dẊ (guh′ · x2 , uh′ x2 ) = dXb (bh−1 · x
                                                              gb          h−1 · x
                                                                     b2 , b     b2 ).
Write h = (uh′ )−1 . Let g ∈ S1 be any element and g ′ the (unique) preimage of b
                                                                                h−1 gbb
                                                                                      h in S2 . We
                 ′       −1                           −1 b
have now that g and h gh are two preimages of h gbh, both of them moving x2 by at most
                                                   b
ρ/100. Now, the triangle inequality yields
             dẊ (g ′−1 h−1 gh · x2 , x2 ) ≤ dẊ (h−1 gh · x2 , x2 ) + dẊ (x2 , h−1 gh · x2 ) ≤ ρ/50.
We have that the element g ′−1 h−1 gh is in K, and furthermore, Theorem 5.8 (4) yields dẊ (x2 , v(Q)) ≥
ρ/2. In consequence, Theorem 5.8 (6) gives that g ′ = h−1 gh, and we obtain the desired conclu-
sion.                                                                                                □
Remark 5.27. Notice that, since the map X −→ X                            h is loxodromic, a
                                             b shortens the distances, if b
preimage h of h is necessarily loxodromic.
              b

    With Lemma 5.26 in mind, we are ready to state the consequences that this result has on the
lifts of elliptic subgroups.
32                                         MARCO AMELIO


Lemma 5.28. (Compare [Cou21, Proposition 4.28]) Let F1 and F2 be subgroups of G such that
F1 is elliptic and F2 is generated by a subset S2 such that Fix(S2 , ρ/100) is non-empty. Let Fb1 and
Fb2 be their respective images in G.
                                   b Assume that Fb1 = Fb2 . Then, one of the following holds.
      • The subgroup Fb1 is contained in a strict reflection group at some apex vb ∈ vb(Q).
      • There exists u ∈ K such that F2 = u−1 F1 u.
Proof. Assume that Fb1 does not lie on a strict reflection group at any apex vb ∈ vb(Q). Let Sb be the
image of S2 in G b and S1 the preimage of Sb in F1 . Notice that Sb does not lie on a strict reflection
group at any apex vb ∈ vb(Q) either: since S2 generates F2 , its image Sb generates Fb2 = Fb1 , so if Sb
was contained in a strict reflection group at some apex then the same would hold for Fb1 . Thus,
we can apply Lemma 5.26 to the sets S1 and S2 and b      h = 1, and we get that there is some u ∈ K
(as a preimage of 1) such that for every s ∈ S1 , the element u−1 su is the preimage of sb on S2 .
Now, since S2 generates F2 , then uF2 u−1 is contained in F1 . By Lemma 5.24 we have that the
quotient map G ↠ G   b is one-to-one when restricted to F1 , and since u ∈ K, the image of uF2 u−1
is F2 = F1 . In consequence, F2 = u−1 F1 u.
   b    b                                                                                             □

     Lemma 5.28 has the following immediate consequence.
Lemma 5.29. (Compare [Cou21, Corollary 4.29]) Let F1 and F2 be subgroups of G such that F1
is elliptic and F2 is generated by a subset S2 such that Fix(S2 , ρ/100) is non-empty. Let Fb1 and
Fb2 be their respective images in G.
                                  b Assume that Fb1 = b   h−1 Fb2 b
                                                                  h. Then, one of the following holds.
       • The subgroup Fb1 is contained in a strict reflection group at some apex vb ∈ vb(Q).
                                      h such that F1 = h−1 F2 h.
       • There exists a preimage h of b
Proof. For the case where Fb1 is not contained in a strict reflection group, we let h′ be any preimage
   h in G, and we apply Lemma 5.28 to F1 and h′−1 F2 h′ . Thus, there exists u ∈ K such that
of b
u F1 u = h′−1 F2 h′ , and the desired conclusion follows from the fact that, since u ∈ K, h = h′ u−1
  −1

                      h.
is also a preimage of b                                                                             □

Remark 5.30. Notice that the assumptions on F2 in Lemmas 5.28 and 5.29 are immediately satisfied
if F2 is elliptic.
  Now, we are ready to classify exactly what elliptic subgroups of G
                                                                   b can be lifted. Lemma 5.31
appears in [Cou21] as Proposition 4.30 with exactly the same statement.

Lemma 5.31. An elliptic subgroup Fb of G        b cannot be lifted if and only if it contains a strict
rotation. In this case, the subgroup Fb fixes an apex vb ∈ vb(Q), and Fix(Fb, δ)   b is contained in
BXb (b
     v , δ) (and thus vb is the unique apex fixed by F ).
         b                                           b

Proof. The proof of [Cou21, Proposition 4.30] adapts completely unchanged to our setting, with
the following caveat: Lemma 5.14 (2) is weaker than [Cou21, Proposition 4.13 (ii)]. However, we
have retrieved precisely the part that we need for this proof to work: for a reflection group Ab at
an apex vb, there exists a point of X at distance greater than ρ/2 of vb that is moved at most δ by
                                    b                                                          b
every element of A.b                                                                              □

     Lemma 5.31 has the following easy consequence, which we state here for future reference.
Lemma 5.32. Let A      b be an elliptic subgroup of G
                                                    b containing a subgroup C
                                                                            b of index 2 in A
                                                                                            b that
lifts. Then, A
             b itself lifts.

Proof. Assume towards a contradiction that C  b lifts but A
                                                          b does not. Then, by Lemma 5.31 there
is a strict rotation gb in A\
                           b C.
                              b However, by construction strict rotations have odd order > 3, and
this contradicts the assumption that Cb has index 2 in A.
                                                        b                                       □
                 NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                 33


   We finish this section with a result on the maximal normal finite subgroups of loxodromic
subgroups of the quotient group.
Lemma 5.33. Let E     b be a loxodromic subgroup of G  b and let Fb be the maximal normal finite
subgroup of E. Then, one of the following holds.
             b
      • Fb is contained in a reflection group at some apex vb ∈ vb(Q).
      • The subgroup E b lifts.
Proof. Without loss of generality, we may assume that E       b is a maximal loxodromic subgroup of G.    b
Let gb be a primitive loxodromic element of E   b and let Y = Ygb. Notice that Y is unbounded, and, in
consequence, it contains a point in the image ζ(X) of X under the map ζ : X −→ X.        b In particular,
by Theorem 5.8 (4), this point is at distance larger that ρ/2 of the apex vb. We distinguish two
cases.
    Case 1: There is some apex vb ∈ vb(Q) such that dXb (b        v , Y ) ≤ ρ/10. By Lemma 4.41 and the
triangle inequality, we have that Y is contained in Fix(Fb, 120δ).        b Therefore, the elements of Fb
move vb by less than ρ/4, thus, F is contained in Stab(b
                                  b                        v ). Now, by Lemma 5.14 (2) the subgroup Fb
cannot contain a strict rotation: for one such element gb, there is a power gbk such that Fix(b  g k , 120δ)
                                                                                                          b
is contained in BXb (b
                     v , 120δ),
                            b but Fix(Fb, 120δ) b is unbounded. Moreover, Fb cannot contain elements
of two distinct strict reflection groups at vb: in such a case, their product would be a strict rotation.
In consequence, we have that Fb must be contained in a reflection group at vb.
    Case 2: For every apex vb ∈ vb(Q) we have that dXb (b     v , Y ) > ρ/10. Now, Y is 2δ-quasi-convex.
                                                                                          b
Therefore, by Lemma 5.17 and Remark 5.18 there is a subgroup E of G such that the quotient map
G↠G    b induces an isomorphism from E onto its image E.      b In particular, E is virtually cyclic (since
the action of G on X is acylindrical, E is virtually cyclic), and in consequence it is elementary.
               b       b                  b
Now, the preimage g of gb in E must be loxodromic by its action on X (since the map ζ : X −→ X            b
shortens distances). Since E is an elementary subgroup of G containing a loxodromic element, it
must be loxodromic. That is, E is a lift of E.   b                                                        □
5.7. Invariants on the quotient space. In this subsection we will study the invariants of the
action of Gb on X.
                b We keep the assumptions and notation introduced throughout this section. For
future reference, we explicitly state a classification of apex stabilizers for quotients of tame actions.
Lemma 5.34. Let vb be an apex in vb(Q). Let (H, Y ) ∈ Q be such that Stab(Y ) is a preimage of
     v ), and let nh be such H = ⟨hnh ⟩ for some primitive loxodromic element h. If the action of
Stab(b
G on X is tame, then Stab(b  v ) is isomorphic to one of the following groups:
                         ∼
   (1) Cnh if Stab(Y ) = Z;
   (2) Cnh × C2 if Stab(Y ) ∼ = Z × C2 ; or
   (3) Dnh if Stab(Y ) ∼ = D∞ ;
Proof. This is a direct consequence of Remark 4.47 and Lemma 5.11.                                         □
   We now start the study of the invariants of the action of G
                                                             b on X.
                                                                  b
Proposition 5.35. (Compare [Cou16b, Proposition 5.27]) Suppose that the action of G on X is
tame. Then, the invariant ν(G,
                            b X)
                               b is bounded from above by max{ν(G, X), 3}.

Proof. Let m ≥ max{ν(G, X), 3} be an integer. Let gb, b              h be elements of G,b with b h loxodromic,
                            −m b m
and such that gb, . . . , h gbh generate an elliptic subgroup E of G. For simplicity of notation, for
                          b                                               b    b
                                h−j gbb
j ∈ {0, . . . , m}, write gbj = b     hm and Sb = {b
                                                   g0 , . . . , gbm }. We will consider two different cases.
    Case 1: there is vb ∈ vb(Q) such that CEb intersects B(b         v , ρ − 50δ).   b ∈ CEb be at distance at
                                                                               b Let x
most ρ − 50δ from vb. The elements of E move the points in CEb by at most 11δ.
                b                           b                                              b Hence, for every
gb ∈ E
     b the triangle inequality yields
                       v , gb · vb) ≤ dXb (b
                  dXb (b                   v, x         g·x
                                              b) + dXb (b b, x         g · vb, gb · x
                                                             b) + dXb (b            b) ≤ 2ρ − 89δ.
34                                                  MARCO AMELIO


Thus, E  b (and so Sb as well) is contained in Stab(b          v ).
    We claim that S cannot contain a strict rotation: indeed, suppose that gbk is a strict rotation.
                         b
By Lemma 5.14 (3), the apex vb is the only one fixed by gbk . However, a conjugate of gbk by b                     h or by
h−1 is also in Sb and thus fixes vb, so gbk fixes either b
b                                                                             h−1 · vb, and we get that b
                                                                    h · vb or b                            h−1 · vb = vb or
h · vb = vb, contradicting in both cases the assumption that b
b                                                                            h is loxodromic.
    Thus, every element of S is contained in a reflection group at Stab(b
                                    b                                                       v ).
    Notice that if for some j ∈ {0, . . . , m} we have that gb = b            h−j gbb
                                                                                    hj , then we get that gb centralizes
the loxodromic element b         hj , so it must fix its accumulation points at infinity, which coincide with
those of b  h. Therefore, we obtain gb and b       h generate an elementary subgroup of G.           b
    Since the action is tame, by Lemma 5.34 it is enough to consider two further subcases.
    Case 1a: if Stab(b     v ) is isomorphic to Cn or Cn × C2 , these groups contain at most one non-trivial
element that is not a strict rotation, and thus, since m ≥ 2, there is some j ∈ {0, . . . , m} such that
gb = bh−j gbb
            hj , so we conclude as before that gb and b         h generate an elementary subgroup.
    Case 1b: Stab(b      v ) is isomorphic to Dn . If two of the gbj ’s coincide, then again as before we
conclude that gb and b      h generate an elementary subgroup. Otherwise, all the gbj ’s must be distinct
involutions. In particular, gb′ = gb0 gb1 is a strict rotation, and in consequence its unique fixed apex
is vb. However, since m ≥ 2, then b         h−1 gb′ b
                                                    h = gb1 gb2 is also an element stabilizing vb, and therefore gb′
fixes the apex b   h · vb. Thus, we have b   h · vb = vb, contradicting the assumption that b          h is loxodromic.
    Case 2: there is no vb ∈ vb(Q) such that CEb intersects B(b                    v , ρ − 50δ). Then, CEb contains a
                                                                                              b
point x b in the 50δ-neighbourhood
                       b                     of ζ(X). Let x be a preimage of x            b in Ẋ. Consider the hull of
Eb·x b, this is a 6δ-quasi-convex
                    b                    subset contained in the 67δ-neighbourhood
                                                                            b                    of ζ(X). Therefore, by
Lemmas 5.16 and 5.17 there exists an elliptic subgroup E of G (by its action on Ẋ) such that the
projection map π : G −→ G           b induces an isomorphism from E onto E,             b and for every j ∈ {0, . . . , m},
the preimage gj of gbj in E satisfies
                                       dẊ (gj · x, x) = dXb (b
                                                              gj · x  b) ≤ 166δ.
                                                                   b, x       b

In particular, we get that for every j ∈ {0, . . . , m − 1},
                                   dXb (b  h·x
                                        gj b    h·x
                                             b, b           gj+1 · x
                                                  b) = dXb (b         b) ≤ 166δ.
                                                                   b, x       b

   We now fix a preimage h of b    h such that dẊ (h · x, x) ≤ dXb (b
                                                                     h·x b, xb) + δ/2,
                                                                                    b        and we let γ be a
(1, δ/2)-quasi-geodesic joining x and h·x. The path γ
    b                                                   b induced by γ is a (1, δ)-quasi-geodesic joining
                                                                                  b
x
b and b h·x b. Suppose that there is some vb ∈ vb(Q) such that ⟨b     h·x
                                                                   x, b   b⟩ ≤ ρ/4. Then, Lemma 4.10
together with the triangle inequality gives that every element of Sb′ = {b     g0 , . . . gbm−1 } is in Stab(bv ).
Now, we conclude as in Case 1 that gb and h generate an elementary subgroup.
                                                b
   If there is no vb ∈ vb(Q) such that ⟨b
                                        x, b h·xb⟩ ≤ ρ/4, we can apply Lemma 5.19 to the path γ            b and
          ′
the set Sb , and so for every j ∈ {0, . . . , m − 1} we get that dẊ (gj h · x, h · x) = dXb (b      h·x
                                                                                                  gj b     h·x
                                                                                                        b, b  b).
We claim now that for j ∈ {0, . . . , m − 1}, h−1 gj h = gj+1 . Indeed, we have that
     dẊ (gj+1 · x, x) = dXb (b
                              gj+1 · x
                                     b, x
                                        b) = dXb (b  h·x
                                                  gj b      b) = dẊ (gj h · x, h · x) = dẊ (h−1 gj h · x, x).
                                                          h·x
                                                       b, b
But then,
         dẊ (h−1 gj−1 hgj+1 · x, x) ≤ dẊ (gj+1 · x, x) + dẊ (gj+1 · x, x) = 2dXb (b
                                                                                     gj+1 · x  b) ≤ 334δ.
                                                                                            b, x       b

We have that gj+1 and h−1 gj h are two preimages of the same element gbj+1 , therefore we get that
h−1 gj−1 hgj+1 is in K. Hence, by Theorem 5.8 (6), we get that h−1 gj h = gj+1 .
   In consequence, for every j ∈ {0, . . . , m}, the element h−j ghj belongs to E, so g, h−1 gh, . . . h−m ghm
generate an elliptic subgroup of G (by its action on Ẋ). Furthermore, by Lemma 5.17 applied to
CEb , the subset CE contains a point in the 67δ-neighbourhood
                                                    b                 of (the image by inclusion into Ẋ
of) X. Let p be a δ-projection of CE on X. For all g ∈ E the point g · p is a δ-projection
                     b                                                               b                of g · x
                  NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                       35


on X. By the triangle inequality and Lemma 5.5 we get that
                  µ(dX (p, g · p)) ≤ dẊ (p, g · p) ≤ 2dẊ (x, p) + dẊ (x, g · x) ≤ 147δb < ρ.
Hence, by Lemma 5.4 we get that for all g ∈ E we have that dX (p, g · p) ≤ π sinh(ρ/2). In
particular, the orbits of E in X are bounded, so E is elliptic by its action on X. Therefore, since
m ≥ ν(G, X), we get that g and h generate an elementary subgroup of G, and thus so do gb and
h.
b                                                                                                □

Proposition 5.36. If the action of G on X is tame, then so is the action of G
                                                                            b on X.
                                                                                 b

Proof. First, assume that G   b has a subgroup Fb of order 4. Notice that Fb is necessarily elliptic.
Then, since G has no subgroup of order 4, Fb cannot lift. Therefore, by Proposition 5.31, it is
contained in Stab(b v ) for some vb ∈ vb(Q). However, no apex stabilizer contains a subgroup of order
4 by Lemma 5.34.
   Now, let E b be a loxodromic subgroup of G,  b and let Fb be its maximal normal finite subgroup. If
E lifts, then F has order at most two since the action of G on X is tame. Otherwise, by Proposition
 b             b
5.33, Fb is contained in a strict reflection group for some vb ∈ vb(Q). However, by Lemma 5.34 these
subgroups have order at most two themselves.                                                        □

   From Propositions 5.35 and 5.36 and the definition of the parameter τ we obtain Corollary 5.37.

Corollary 5.37. If the action of G on X is tame, then the invariant τ (G,
                                                                       b X)
                                                                          b is at most τ (G, X).

  The next result appears as Proposition 5.29 in [Cou16b]. As it was explained before, the small
cancellation assumptions in that context are not exactly the same as in this article. However, the
proof of that result works verbatim for our case.

Proposition 5.38. [Cou16b, Proposition 5.29] Let m be an integer, gb0 , . . . gbm be elements of G
                                                                                                 b of
translation length at most LS δ.
                              b Then one of the following holds:
    (1) There is vb ∈ vb(Q) such that gbi ∈ Stab(bv ) for every i ∈ {0, . . . , m}.
    (2) There exist preimages gi of gbi for i ∈ {0, . . . , m} with translation length at most π sinh((LS +
        34)δ)
           b such that

                     g0 , . . . , gbm ) ≤ A(g0 , . . . , gm ) + π sinh((LS + 34)δ)
                   A(b                                                          b + (LS + 45)δ.
                                                                                             b

   The next corollary allows us to control the parameter Ω(G,
                                                            b X)
                                                              b in terms of Ω(G, X) and τ (G, X).
It is a direct adaptation of Corollary 5.30 in [Cou16b], modulo replacing A by Ω and ν by τ when
appropriate. For the sake of completeness, we include the proof.

Corollary 5.39. The invariant Ω(G,
                                b X)
                                   b is bounded by

                            Ω(G, b ≤ Ω(G, X) + (τ (G, X) + 4)π sinh(2LS δ).
                              b X)                                      b

Proof. We denote by τb the invariant τ (G,                    b and, similarly, τ = τ (G, X). Write A′ for the set of
                                                          b X),
(b
 τ + 1)-tuples (b     g0 , . . . gbτb) of elements of G generating a non-elementary subgroup and of translation
                                                         b
length at most LS δ.         b
   Since these elements generate a non-elementary subgroup, there is no vb ∈ vb(Q) such that
they are all contained in Stab(b              v ). Therefore, by Proposition 5.38, we have preimages gi of gbi for
i ∈ {0, . . . , τb} such that
      • the translation length is bounded by π sinh((LS + 34)δ);                b and
      • A(b    g0 , . . . , gbτb) ≤ A(g0 , . . . , gτb) + π sinh((LS + 34)δ) + (LS + 45)δ.
                                                                          b               b
Since the image of an elementary subgroup of G (by its action on X) is elementary, the elements
g0 , . . . , gτb must generate a non-elementary subgroup. We have, by Corollary 5.37, that τb ≤ τ , thus
36                                          MARCO AMELIO


by Corollary 4.53 we obtain
   g0 , . . . , gbτb) ≤ (τ + 2)π sinh((LS + 34)δ)
 A(b                                           b + Ω(G, X) + 680δ + π sinh((LS + 34)δ)
                                                                                    b + (LS + 45)δb

               ≤ (τ + 4)π sinh(2LS δ)
                                   b + Ω(G, X)
                                     τ + 1)-tuple in A′ , the announced conclusion follows.
Since this inequality holds for any (b                                                                □
   Definition 5.40, Lemma 5.41 and Corollary 5.42 appear in [AAT23] as Definition 4.22, Lemma
4.23 and Corollary 4.24 (for the more general case of a WPD action, here the reader may replace
‘non-elliptic’ for ‘loxodromic’). We include the statements here. The proofs of the results work
exactly as in the reference (thus, in particular, as in Proposition 5.31 of [Cou16b]).
Definition 5.40. Let Q′ be a subset of G and Q     b ′ its image in G.
                                                                    b We say that Q′ is stable with
                                                                                         b ′ . Suppose
respect to Q if the following property is satisfied: let gb be a non-elliptic element of Q
that there is a subset A of Ẋ such that the projection ζ : Ẋ −→ X      b induces an isometry from
A onto the axis Agbm for some m ∈ N and the projection G ↠ G         b induces an isomorphism from
Stab(A) onto Stab(Agbm ). Let g be the preimage of gb in Stab(A). Then g ∈ Q′ .
   For all the applications in this article, the stable family can be taken to be just the whole set of
loxodromic elements of G. However, the more general results from Section 6 may be useful when
trying to impose torsion only on a reduced subset of elements of G, as is in the case of [AAT23]
(where the family Q′ is taken to be the loxodromic translations of G).
Lemma 5.41. (Compare [Cou16b, Proposition 5.31]) Let Q′ be a stable subset of G. Denote by l
the infimum over the asymptotic translation length in X of loxodromic elements of Q′ that do not
                                                                        b ′ . If every preimage of gb in
belong to Stab(Y ) for (H, Y ) ∈ Q. Let gb be a non-elliptic element of Q
G is loxodromic, then we have
                                                                
                                                       lδb
                                   g ]∞ ≥ min
                                  [b                          , δb .
                                                  πsinh(26δ)b
Corollary 5.42. Let Q′ be a stable subset of G. Denote by l the infimum over the asymptotic
translation length in X of loxodromic elements of Q′ that do not belong to Stab(Y ) for (H, Y ) ∈ Q.
Then we have                                                      
                                     b ′ , X)
                                           b ≥ min       lδb
                               rinj (Q                          , δb .
                                                     πsinh(26δ)
                                                             b

               6. Partial periodic quotients of groups with even torsion
  The goal of this section is to prove a small cancellation result for certain groups with even torsion
exhibiting some form of negative curvature. We will obtain such a result by taking a sequence of
quotients of the original group as in Section 5 (we will call them SC-quotients), where the small
cancellation parameters ∆ and T from Theorem 5.8 will be controlled by the parameters rinj , τ
and Ω, as well as by the tameness of the actions. Then, we will pass to the limit of this sequence
(we will call the group obtained in the limit a PP-quotient).
6.1. The induction step: SC-quotients. In this subsection, we prove the induction step in the
aforementioned construction. More concretely, we will prove the following result.
Proposition 6.1. There exist positive constants ρ0 , δ1 and LS such that for every integer τ0 ≥ 3
there is a positive integer n0 with the following properties. Let G be a group acting by isometries
on a δ1 -hyperbolic length space X. We assume that this action is acylindrical and non-elementary.
Let n1 ≥ n0 . Let N = {n(m) : 1 ≤ m ≤ l′ } be a finite family of odd integers such that n(m) ≥ n1
for m ∈ {1, . . . , l′ }. Let Q be a conjugation invariant set of elements of G. We make the following
assumptions.
    (1) The action of G on X is tame,
               NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                          37


   (2) τ (G, X) ≤ τ0 ,
   (3) Ω(G, X) ≤ 6πτ0 qsinh(2LS δ1 ),
                              LS sinh(ρ0 )
   (4) rinj (Q, X) ≥ 2δ1     n1 sinh(26δ1 ) .

    We define an equivalence relation on the set of primitive loxodromic elements of Q as follows:
we say that h and h′ are equivalent if they generate an elementary subgroup or if they are conjugate
in G. Let P be a maximal subset of loxodromic elements h of Q which are primitive, such that
[h] ≤ LS δ1 and such that no two elements are equivalent.
    Let K = ⟨hnh : h ∈ P ⟩G with nh ∈ N for all h ∈ P . Put G      b = G/K. Then there exists a
δ1 -hyperbolic length space X on which G acts by isometries. This action is non-elementary, tame
                            b            b
and acylindrical.
    In addition, the action of Gb on X  b satisfies Assumptions (2) and (3). We define a family
Q as follows: Q = {(⟨h ⟩, Yh ) : h ∈ P ′ }, where the set P ′ is defined as P ′ =
                           nh
                                                                                          S −1
                                                                                             g P g,
                                                                                        g∈G
and the exponents nh are taken to be exactly as in the definition of the subgroup K for the el-
ements of P andqinvariant under conjugation. If Q is stable with respect to the family Q, then
rinj (Q, b ≥ 2δ1 LS sinh(ρ0 ) , where Q
      b X)                            b is the set of images of elements of Q in the quotient that
                   n1 sinh(26δ1 )
remain loxodromic for their action on X.
                                      b
  Furthermore, for the quotient map G ↠ G,
                                         b denote by gb the image of an element g (respectively,
denote by E the image of a subgroup E). Then, this map has the following properties.
          b
     • For every g ∈ G we have
                                               s                       
                                    1  4π          sinh(ρ0 ) sinh(26δ1 )  ∞
                            g ]∞
                           [b  b ≤ √
                               X
                                                                           [g]X .
                                     n1 δ 1                  LS

     • For every elliptic subgroup E of G, the quotient map G ↠ G b induces an isomorphism from
       E onto its image E, which is itself elliptic.
                           b
                                        b Either there is n ∈ N such that gb2n = 1, or gb is the
     • Let gb be an elliptic element of G.
       image of an elliptic element of G.
     • Let u, u′ ∈ G be such that [u] < ρ0 /100 and u′ is elliptic. Assume that u         b′ are
                                                                                    b and u
                                                        ′
       conjugate in G,
                     b say by an element h, and that u is not contained in a loxodromic subgroup
                                           b
       of dihedral type on which it is not in its maximal normal finite subgroup. Then, u and u′
       are conjugate in G, and the conjugating element can be taken to be a preimage h of bh.

Remark 6.2. For the applications of this article, the reader can just take Q to be the family of all
loxodromic elements of G (which is, indeed, stable).

Remark 6.3. In Subsection 6.2, we will iteratively apply Proposition 6.1 for the same family of
positive integers N , so that in particular we obtain a bound in the exponent of the new torsion
we are creating. Therefore, we need to be able to take the same value of the parameter n1 of
Proposition 6.1 at every step of the construction. For this purpose, we need control over the
elliptic subgroups normalized by loxodromic elements, both in the group G and in the quotient G.
                                                                                               b
In the setting of [Cou16b] and [Cou21], this is accomplished by the parameters e(G, X) and µ(E)
(plus an assumption on the structure of dihedral pairs) respectively. In our case, Assumption (1)
will play this role.

Proof. The proof closely follows the proofs of Proposition 6.1 in [Cou16b] and of Proposition 4.25
in [AAT23]. We include some details of the proof, focusing on the construction of the space Xb for
later reference, and we will refer to the aforementioned proofs whenever parts of this proof work
exactly as in those cases.
38                                           MARCO AMELIO


  Fix now an integer τ0 ≥ 3. Let ρ0 , LS , δ0 , δ1 and ∆0 be the parameters coming from small
cancellation as in Theorem 5.8. We define a rescaling parameter λl depending on an integer l as
                                         s
                                      4π sinh(ρ0 ) sinh(26δ1 )
                                 λl =                          .
                                      δ1            lLS
Now we set the critical exponent n0 : let n0 be the smallest integer greater than 100 such that for
every l ≥ n0 we have
                                             λl δ1 ≤ δ0 ,
                     λl (6πτ0 sinh(2LS δ1 ) + 118δ1 ) ≤ min{∆0 , π sinh(2LS δ1 )},
                                                  Ls δ12
                                        λl                  ≤ δ1 ,
                                             2π sinh(26δ1 )
and
                                             λl ρ0 ≤ ρ0 .
                          (m)                  ′
Let n1 ≥ n0 and N = {n          : 1 ≤ m ≤ l } be a family of odd integers, all greater than n1 . Set
λ = λn1 .
   Assume that we have a group G acting on a hyperbolic space X and Q a set of elements of
G such that the assumptions of Proposition 6.1 are satisfied for τ0 and n1 . For the rest of the
proof, unless explicitly stated otherwise, we will consider the action of G on the rescaled space λX.
This space will be δ-hyperbolic with δ = λδ1 ≤ δ0 . The action of G on λX is still acylindrical,
non-elementary and tame. Let P , P ′ and Q be as in the statement of the proposition. By design,
the family P ′ is closed under conjugation, since this is the case for the family Q, and the tameness
of the action will give (in virtue of Remark 4.47) that two equivalent primitive loxodromic elements
of Q differ only by inversion or multiplication by a central element of their maximal loxodromic
subgroup. Moreover, this classification of loxodromic subgroups of G gives ⟨hnh ⟩ ⊴ Stab(Yh ). In
particular, if (H, Y ) and (H ′ , Y ′ ) are pairs in Q such that Y = Y ′ , then H = H ′ .
   Claim 1:∆(Q) ≤ ∆0 and T (Q) ≥ 8π sinh(ρ0 ). Let h1 and h2 be two elements of P such
         n                  n
that (⟨h1 h1 ⟩, Yh1 ) ̸= (⟨h2 h2 ⟩, Yh2 ). By Lemma 4.33 we have that Yhi is contained in the 52δ-
neighbourhood of Ahi , so by Lemma 4.17, since Yhi is strongly quasi-convex, we obtain
                        diam(Yh+5δ
                               1
                                   ∩ Yh+5δ
                                       2
                                           ) ≤ diam(A+13δ
                                                     h1   ∩ A+13δ
                                                             h2 ) + 118δ.

By construction of P ′ , we have that h1 and h2 generate a non-elementary subgroup of G, and
their translation length in λX is at most LS δ. On the other hand, by Remark 4.54 we get
Ω(G, λX) ≤ λΩ(G, X). In consequence, we obtain
            diam(Yh+5δ
                   1
                       ∩ Yh+5δ
                           2
                               ) ≤ λΩ(G, X) + 118λδ1 ≤ λ(6πτ0 sinh(2Ls δ1 ) + 118δ1 ),
and therefore, by the choice of λ we get ∆(Q) ≤ ∆0 .
   For the second part of the claim, again by Remark 4.54, Assumption (4) and the definition of
the rescaling parameter λ we have that for all h ∈ P ′
                                                       8π sinh(ρ0 )   8π sinh(ρ0 )
                      rinj (Q, λX) = λrinj (Q, X) ≥                 ≥              .
                                                            n1             nh
Therefore, since P ′ is a subset of Q, we obtain [hnh ]∞ = nh [h]∞ ≥ 8π sinh(ρ0 ). Thus, from Lemma
4.26 we conclude T (Q) ≥ 8π sinh(ρ0 ).
   In view of the previous claim, we can now apply Theorem 5.8 to the action of G on the rescaled
space λX. We denote by Ẋ the cone-off space of radius ρ0 over X relative to the family Y = {Y :
(H, Y ) ∈ Q} and by X  b the quotient of Ẋ by the action of K. By Theorem 5.8, X  b is a δ-hyperbolic
                                                                                          b
length space with δ ≤ δ1 on which G acts by isometries. Since the action of G on X is tame and
                    b                  b
the set N is finite, we have |Stab(Yh )/⟨hnh ⟩| ≤ 2 max(N ), so by Lemma 5.21 the action of G    b on
Xb is acylindrical. Furthermore, by Lemma 5.36 this action is tame.
   The fact that τ (G,
                     b X)b ≤ τ0 is a consequence of Remark 4.54 and Corollary 5.37.
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                              39


  Claim 2: Ω(G, b ≤ 6πτ0 sinh(2LS δ1 ). By Corollary 5.39 we have
             b X)

                            Ω(G, b ≤ Ω(G, λX) + (τ0 + 4)π sinh(2LS δ1 ).
                              b X)
Now, Remark 4.54 and the definition of λ give us
                   Ω(G, λX) = λΩ(G, X) ≤ λ6πτ0 sinh(2LS δ1 ) ≤ π sinh(2LS δ1 ).
Therefore, Ω(G,b X)b is at most (τ0 + 5)π sinh(2LS δ1 ), and the fact that τ0 ≥ 1 completes the proof
of the claim.                                                               q
   Claim 3: if Q is stable with respect to Q, then rinj (Q,     b X)b ≥ 2δ1 LS sinh(ρ0 ) . Let h be a
                                                                              n1 sinh(26δ1 )
loxodromic element of Q that is not in the stabilizer of Yg for g ∈ P ′ . By construction of P ′ , h
has translation length at least LS δ1 in X, and thus by Remark 4.54 asymptotic translation length
greater than λLS δ1 /2 in λX. If Q is stable with respect to Q, we can apply Corollary 5.42 (and
our definition of λ) to get
                                                                            s
                                         2                        2
                     b ≥ min{      λLS δ 1                 λL S δ 1            LS sinh(ρ0 )
            rinj (Q,
                  b X)                        , δ1 } =                = 2δ1                  .
                               2π sinh(26δ1 )          2π sinh(26δ1 )         n1 sinh(26δ1 )

   We now focus on the announced properties of the map G −→ G.           b The claim about [b g ]∞
                                                                                                 b follows
                                                                                                 X
from the fact that [g]∞ λX  ≤  λ[g] ∞
                                    X  and  that   the  map  λX   −→  Xb shortens distances. The second
claim is contained in Lemma 5.24.
   Claim 4: let gb be an elliptic element of G.     b Either gb2n = 1 or gb is the image of an elliptic
element of G. By Lemma 5.31 applied to ⟨b        g ⟩, either this subgroup can be lifted (and therefore gb
has an elliptic preimage) or it contains a strict rotation, and thus gb is itself a strict rotation in
some vb ∈ vb(Q). In this last case, there is some n ∈ N such that gbn is locally trivial in vb, so it is
contained in an elliptic subgroup Fb of G    b that is the isomorphic image of an elliptic subgroup F
of G normalized by a loxodromic element. Now, the action of G on X is tame, so the order of F
(and thus of Fb) is at most 2. Therefore, (b   g n )2 = 1.
   The last property of the projection map follows directly from Proposition 5.29 applied to ⟨u⟩ and
⟨u′ ⟩, and the fact that strict reflection groups of G  b are images of elliptic subgroups of G contained
in loxodromic subgroups but not in their maximal elliptic normal subgroup.                              □
   Terminology. For the remainder of this article, we will call a group obtained as the quotient
of a group G as provided by Proposition 6.1 a small cancellation quotient (or an SC-quotient) of
G, and we will denote it by G.
                             b Similarly, if X is the length space on which we consider the action
of G to apply Proposition 6.1, we will write Xb for the hyperbolic length space on which G
                                                                                         b acts as
provided by the proposition.
6.2. The limit step: PP-quotients. In this subsection, we construct partial periodic quotients
of a group G exhibiting negative curvature features by taking a sequence of SC-quotients as in
Proposition 6.1.
    For this purpose, notice that an SC-quotient of a group G exists whether the family Q considered
in Proposition 6.1 is stable or not. However, if we want to iteratively apply the proposition for the
same family N , we will need to take an SC-quotient of G    b with the same value of the parameter
n1 , and for this we need to bound the injectivity radius of Q.
                                                             b This is the point where the stability
of the family Q is key. In particular, if Q is stable with respect to Q
                                            b                             b (where Q b is the family
constructed from G and Q exactly as Q is constructed from G and Q) then all the assumptions of
                    b      b
Proposition 6.1 are satisfied. To ensure that the necessary bound on the injectivity radius holds
throughout the whole inductive process, in [AAT23, Definition 4.26] the notion of a strongly stable
family is introduced. We re-introduce it now, with a slight modification to better suit our setting.
Definition 6.4. Let Q be a subset of G. We say that Q is strongly stable if the following property
holds.
40                                           MARCO AMELIO


   Suppose {Gb i : 0 ≤ i ≤ k} is a finite sequence of quotients obtained from G = G     b 0 by successive
applications of Theorem 5.8, where the space on which G0 acts is (a possibly rescaled version of)
                                                              b
X, and the space X bi+1 on which G  b i+1 acts is (a possibly rescaled version of) the space Xb provided
by Lemma 5.8 when we consider the action of G         b i on Xbi . Suppose furthermore that at step i
the family Qi was constructed taking the subsets Hi of G       b i to be the nh -th power of a primitive
loxodromic element h in the image of Q in Gi and nh ∈ N , and Y to be the cylinder of this nh -th
                     b                          b
power.
   Then the image Q              b i is stable with respect to Qi .
                     b i of Q in G

     The previous ad hoc definition has the following immediate consequence.

Lemma 6.5. In the setting of Definition 6.4, if Q is strongly stable, then so is Q.
                                                                                 b

   In particular, with the additional assumption that the family Q is strongly stable, we can indeed
iterate the application of Proposition 6.1.
Remark 6.6. For all the applications of this article, the reader can just take the family Q to be the
set of all loxodromic elements of G, which will indeed be a strongly stable family. However, this
result can be useful when trying to impose torsion only on a certain subset of elements of G, as is
the case in [AAT23]. Thus, we will keep this more general version.
Theorem 6.7. (Compare [Cou16b, Theorem 6.9] and [AAT23, Theorem 4.28]) Let X be a δ-
hyperbolic length space, and let G be a group acting acylindrically and non-elementarily by isome-
tries on X. We suppose that the action is tame. Let Q be a conjugation invariant strongly stable
family of elements of G. We assume, in addition, that the invariants τ (G, X) and Ω(G, X) are
finite and that rinj (Q, X) is positive. Then, there exists a normal subgroup K and a critical expo-
nent n1 depending only on δ, τ (G, X), Ω(G, X) and rinj (Q, X) such that, for every finite family
N = {n(m) : 1 ≤ m ≤ l′ } of odd integers with n(m) ≥ n1 for all m ∈ {1, . . . , l′ }, the following
holds. Write Ḡ = G/K:
     (1) if E is an elliptic subgroup of G, the projection G ↠ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from E
         onto its image;
     (2) every non-trivial element of K is loxodromic;
     (3) for every element ḡ of Ḡ of finite order, either ḡ 2n = 1 for some n ∈ N or ḡ is the image
         of an elliptic element of G. Moreover, for every element h ∈ Q, either its image h̄ satisfies
         h̄2n = 1 for some n ∈ N or it is identified with the image of an elliptic element of G;
     (4) there are infinitely many elements in Ḡ that are not the image of an elliptic element of G.
Proof. As stated above, we will prove Theorem 6.7 by iteratively applying Proposition 6.1. More
concretely, we will put G0 = G and then produce a sequence (Gi )i∈N where we obtain Gi+1 from
Gi by adding new relations of the form hnh for h a loxodromic element of the image of Q in Gi
that is primitive in Gi and nh ∈ N (as prescribed by Proposition 6.1). The group Ḡ will be the
limit of this sequence.
     Even though most of the proof is similar to those of Theorem 6.9 in [Cou16b] and Theorem 4.28
in [AAT23], we include a proof here for the sake of completeness.
     Keeping the same notation for the constants LS , ρ0 and δ1 as in Proposition 6.1, write τ0 =
τ (G, X). Let G0 = G, Q0 = Q and X0 = λ′ X where λ′ is the greatest real number such that
δ ′ = λδ ≤ δ1 and Ω(G, X0 ) ≤ 6πτ0 sinh(2LS δ1 ). Therefore, by Remark 4.54, we have that X0 is
δ ′ -hyperbolic, and that the action of G0 on X0 is tame, acylindrical, non-elementary and satisfies
τ (G0 , X0 ) = τ (G, X), rinj (Q0 , X0 ) = λrinj (Q, X) and Ω(G0 , X0 ) = λΩ(G, X). Moreover, the
family Q is strongly stable. We define the critical exponent n1 as the smallest positive integer such
that                                                  s
                                                           LS sinh(ρ0 )
                                  rinj (Q0 , X0 ) ≥ 2δ1
                                                          n1 sinh(26δ1 )
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                              41


and                                    s                       
                                   1  4π sinh(ρ0 ) sinh(26δ1 ) 
                               1> √                               .
                                    n1 δ1          LS

Notice that, indeed, n1 depends only on δ, τ (G, X), Ω(G, X) and rinj (Q, X). Write c1 for the
constant appearing in the first of these equations and c2 for the constant appearing in the second
one. Fix now a family N = {n(m) : 1 ≤ m ≤ l′ } of odd integers such that n(m) ≥ n1 for
all m ∈ {1, . . . , l′ }. Denote by P0 a maximal set of primitive loxodromic elements h of Q0 with
translation length at most LS δ1 that are non-equivalent   under the equivalence relation defined in
the statement of Proposition 6.1, and we set P0′ =
                                                      S −1
                                                         g P0 g. Put Q0 = {(⟨hnh ⟩, Yhnh ) : h ∈ P0′ }
                                                     g∈G0
with nh ∈ N and with nh = nh′ if h and h′ are conjugate. Since Q is a strongly stable subset of
G, then Q0 is stable with respect to Q0 , so we have that G0 , X0 and Q0 satisfy the hypotheses of
Proposition 6.1 for τ0 , the exponent n1 and the family Q0 .
   Now, suppose that we have constructed a quotient group Gi of G acting on a hyperbolic space
Xi . Let Qi be the image of Q0 in Gi , and suppose that Gi , Xi and Qi satisfy the assumptions of
Proposition 6.1 for τ0 and exponent n1 , except that a priori Qi is not required to be stable with
respect to some family. Suppose furthermore that for every 1 ≤ j ≤ i, the group Gj has been
                                                     ′
obtained from Gj−1 as a quotient by a subgroup Kj−1      = ⟨h′nh : h′ ∈ Pj−1
                                                                          ′                ′
                                                                             ⟩Gj−1 where Pj−1  is a
conjugation invariant set of primitive loxodromic elements in the image Qj−1 of Q in Gj−1 and
nh′ ∈ N for all h′ ∈ Pj−1
                        ′
                           . Denote by Pi′ a maximal set of primitive loxodromic elements h of the
image Qi of Q in Gi such that [h]Xi ≤ LS δ1 and such that no two elements are equivalent     under
the equivalence relation defined in the statement of Proposition 6.1. Set Pi′ =
                                                                                   S −1
                                                                                      g Pi g. Put
                                                                                      g∈Gi
Qi = {(⟨hnh ⟩, Yhnh ) : h ∈ Pi′ } with nh ∈ N and with nh = nh′ if h and h′ are conjugate. Since Q is
a strongly stable family of elements of G, we have that Qi is stable with respect to Qi , so indeed Gi ,
Xi and Qi satisfy the hypotheses of Proposition 6.1 for τ0 , n1 and Qi . Let Ki = ⟨hn : h ∈ Pi ⟩Gi .
By Proposition 6.1, the quotient Gi+1 = Gi /Ki acts on a hyperbolic space Xi+1 , and if we write
Qi+1 for the image of Q on Gi+1 , then Gi+1 , Xi+1 and Qi+1 satisfy themselves the hypotheses of
Proposition 6.1 for τ0 and n1 , except that a priori Qi+1 is not stable with respect to some family.
   Therefore, the sequence (Gi )i∈N is well-defined. Write Ḡ for the limit of this sequence. We have
that Ḡ is indeed a quotient of G by a normal subgroup K. We claim that this group satisfies the
announced properties.
   Claim 1: if E is an elliptic subgroup of G, the projection G −→ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from
E onto its image. Indeed, since every Gi is obtained from Gi−1 by applying Proposition 6.1, an
inductive argument shows that the projection G −→ Gi induces an isomorphism from E onto its
image, which is itself elliptic. Therefore, the projection onto the limit also induces the claimed
isomorphism.
   Claim 2: every element of K is loxodromic. Let g be a non-trivial element of K, and suppose
towards a contradiction that g is elliptic. Then, by Claim 1 applied to the elliptic subgroup ⟨g⟩,
the projection G −→ Ḡ induces an isomorphism onto its image, so in particular, the image ḡ of g
in Ḡ would be non-trivial, and we arrive at a contradiction.
   Claim 3: for every element ḡ of Ḡ of finite order, either ḡ 2n = 1 for some n ∈ N or ḡ is the
image of an elliptic element of G. Moreover, for every element h ∈ Q, either its image h̄ satisfies
h̄2n = 1 for some n ∈ N or it is identified with the image of an elliptic element of G. An inductive
argument using Proposition 6.1 shows that if g ′ is an elliptic element of Gi , then either g ′2n = 1 for
some n ∈ N or it is the image of an elliptic element of G. Let now ḡ be an element of Ḡ of finite
order that is not the image of an elliptic element of G. Denote by g a preimage of ḡ in G and by
gi the image of g in Gi . Notice that g is loxodromic, and that if gi was infinite for all i ∈ N, then
ḡ would be of infinite order itself. Thus, there exists j ∈ N such that gj is loxodromic and gj+1
is of finite order, and the first part of our claim follows from the third property of the projection
map from Proposition 6.1.
42                                           MARCO AMELIO


    For the second part of the claim, with the notation of the previous paragraph, assume that ḡ is in
the image Q̄ of Q in Ḡ. By the construction of the sequence (Gi )i∈N , we have that [gi ]Xi ≤ (c2 )i [g]X .
Therefore, there is j ∈ N such that [gj ]Xj < c1 ≤ rinj (Qj , Xj ). In particular, since gj ∈ Qj , it
is elliptic, and again the conclusion follows from the third property of the projection map from
Proposition 6.1.
    Claim 4: there are infinitely many elements in Ḡ that are not the image of an elliptic element
of G. Notice that it is enough to prove the claim for Q being the set of all loxodromic elements of
G. For such a case, denote by D the set of loxodromic elements of G that are not identified with
an elliptic element of G in Ḡ, and assume that its image in Ḡ is finite. In particular, there exists a
finite set S of G such that D ⊆ S · K. An argument analogous to the one at the end of the previous
claim applied to the finite set S gives that there is some j ∈ N such that all elements of the image
Sj of S in Gj are elliptic. Fix now a preimage g ∈ D of an element gj of Pj′ . By construction, gj
is loxodromic with [gj ]Xj ≤ LS δ1 < ρ0 /100 and its image gj+1 in Gj+1 is elliptic. Furthermore,
since D is contained in S · K, there is some l > j such that gl is in Sl . Now, by the choice of
the exponents, the order of gl is not a power of 2, so the element of Sl with which it is identified
cannot be contained in a strict reflection group at any step of the inductive process (since all the
actions under consideration are tame). Thus, an inductive argument using the fourth property of
the projection map from Proposition 6.1 shows that gj is conjugate to an element of Sj . However,
gj is loxodromic and all elements of Sj are elliptic, so we arrive at a contradiction.                   □
   Terminology. For the remainder of this article, we will call a group obtained as a quotient of
a group G as provided by Theorem 6.7 a partial periodic quotient (or a PP-quotient) of G, and we
will denote it by Ḡ.
Remark 6.8. Notice that, up to making our critical exponent n1 larger, we may take a smaller
value for the rescaling parameter λ′ . In particular, in Subsection 7.2 we will be interested in the
greatest real number λ′′ that, in addition to all requirements for λ′ , satisfies
                                               λ′′ 2 ≤ LS δ1 .
We will call n′1 the critical exponent imposed by this additional assumption.
Remark 6.9. Let us now include some discussion and a ‘toy example’ to illustrate the way in which
the tameness assumption allows us to control the small cancellation assumptions throughout the
proof of Theorem 6.7 (or more precisely, what can go wrong when the action is not tame), and how
this relates to the necessity of the assumption that the prime number p ≡ 3 (mod 4) in Theorem
1.1.
   We consider the minimal relaxation of tameness that would still make sense if we wanted to define
classes analogous to WST (p, q1 , q2 ) and WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) for a prime p ≡ 1 (mod 4) (see further
below in this remark for more details): suppose that we have a group G acting acylindrically
on a hyperbolic space X in such a way that every finite subgroup normalized by a loxodromic
element has order at most 2, and that no two involutions commute, but G is allowed to have cyclic
subgroups of order 4. We want to understand whether we can get a PP-quotient of G analogous
to the one in Theorem 6.7.
   The relaxation of the requirement that G has no subgroup of order 4 allows for one more
isomorphism type in the classification from Remark 4.47: a loxodromic subgroup can now be
isomorphic to C4 ∗C2 C4 . Therefore, if we take a small cancellation quotient as in Theorem 5.8
(or more concretely, as in the inductive step analogous to Proposition 6.1), from Lemma 5.33 we
obtain that there may be a loxodromic subgroup of the quotient group G        b (for its action on the
space X) whose maximal normal finite subgroup is C4 .
       b
   Now, C4 admits a non-trivial automorphism of order 2. This means that we could have a
loxodromic subgroup H  b of Gb whose maximal normal finite subgroup Fb is not central in H.   b Even
more: consider one such subgroup, and take b  h∈H  b to be a loxodromic element. Since C4 admits
an automorphism of order 2, an odd power b    hn of bh is not guaranteed to centralize Fb, and thus,
                 NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                43


the subgroup H   b ′ = ⟨b
                        hn ⟩ is not guaranteed to be normal in H, b which, as noted in Remark 5.9,
is key in order to have that the small cancellation conditions are satisfied. If we wanted to be
able to guarantee that H    b ′ is normal in H,
                                              b we would need to take an even exponent n. This
in turn would create several complications of a different nature: first, as was explained before,
controlling the algebraic structure of an even exponent quotient of a negatively curved group is
a much more delicate matter than doing so for an odd exponent. Also, we are creating in this
process new involutions, over which we have no control: for example, they need not be conjugate
to the involutions coming from isomorphic images of subgroups of order 2 in G.
   At this point, one may have the hope of being able to avoid, throughout the induction process,
the appearance of loxodromic elements inverting a generator of a subgroup isomorphic to C4 by
some other method. Let us show why this strategy is bound to fail in our setting.
   The key point to be able to assert that an action (on the Bass-Serre tree) of an HNN-extension
of a group in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) is tame is that the primer number p is congruent to 3 (mod 4).
In this case, AGL(1, Fp ) has no subgroups of order 4 (since, in this case, 4 does not divide the order
of this group, which is p(p − 1)). On the other hand, if we want to consider a prime number p ≡ 1
(mod 4), then AGL(1, Fp ) has, indeed, cyclic subgroups of order 4, since the multiplicative group
of Fp is cyclic of order p − 1. In particular, when taking HNN-extensions as in the construction in
Section 3, we will find ourselves conjugating an involution contained in a subgroup isomorphic to
C4 to other involutions. This will create, in fact, elementary subgroups isomorphic to C4 ∗C2 C4 .
But even more so: it will create longer chains of (non-elementary) subgroups isomorphic to several
copies of C4 amalgamated over the same involution.
   We now show how this creates loxodromic elements inverting the generator of a subgroup iso-
morphic to C4 . Let G be a group isomorphic to four copies of C4 amalgamated over the same copy
of C2 , that is, a subgroup with the following presentation:
                               ⟨s, t, u, v|s4 , t4 , u4 , v 4 , s2 = t2 = u2 = v 2 ⟩.
Consider the action of this group on the Bass-Serre tree X corresponding to the previously men-
tioned splitting. Let G   b be the quotient of G by the normal closure of the set (of loxodromic
elements) {(st)n1 , (tu)n2 , (uv)n3 , (vs)n4 }. If we pick the ni ’s to be large enough, this is indeed a
small cancellation quotient of G, so by Theorem 5.8, the images sb, b     t, u
                                                                             b and vb of the generators still
have order 4, and there is a hyperbolic space X     b on which G  b acts. Now, if all the ni ’s are odd, con-
                              n1 −1      n2 −1     n3 −1      n4 −1
sider the element gb = (b tsb) 2 (b ubt)− 2 (b vub) 2 (b svb)− 2 . This element will be loxodromic (by
its action on the space X).b Now, a simple calculation (for example, using van Kampen diagrams)
will show that gb−1 sbgb = sb−1 .

                                    7. Proof of Proposition 3.2
  The goal of this section is to provide a proof of Proposition 3.2. For the sake of completeness,
we now state this result again.
Proposition 7.1. Let (G, X) be a pair in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) for some prime p and odd numbers
q1 and q2 . Then, G has a quotient group Ḡ that is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) with the following
additional properties.
    (1) Every involution of Ḡ is the image of an involution of G.
    (2) If F is an elliptic subgroup of G (for its action on X), then the projection map G ↠ Ḡ
        induces an isomorphism from F onto its image.
                                         (2)
    (3) The image of a pair (r, s) ∈ IG of p-affine (respectively, of p-minimal) type is again of
                                                                                 (2)
        p-affine (respectively, of p-minimal) type. Moreover, a pair (r̄, s̄) ∈ IḠ is of p-affine type
                                                               (2)
        if and only if every preimage of the pair in IG is of p-affine type.
    (4) Let g ∈ G be an element of finite order ≥ 3, and let ḡ be its image on Ḡ. Then, the
        projection map G ↠ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from NG (⟨g⟩) onto NḠ (⟨ḡ⟩) (and thus also
        from CenG (g) onto CenḠ (ḡ)).
44                                          MARCO AMELIO


     (5) If G contains a translation of infinite order and translation length at most 2, then Ḡ
         contains non-commuting translations.
     (6) If G contains an element of infinite order that is not a translation, that has translation
         length 1 and that centralizes no involution, then Ḡ contains an element of order q1 that is
         not a translation and centralizes no involution.
     (7) If G contains an element of infinite order (which is not a translation), that has translation
         length 1 and that centralizes an involution, then Ḡ contains an element of order q2 which
         is not a translation and centralizes an involution.
   This result will be obtained by applying Theorem 6.7 to a pair (G, X) in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ),
where the additional properties will be obtained by a refined study of the quotients provided by
Proposition 6.1 in this particular setting.
   We start by defining an auxiliary class denoted by WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ), analogous to class ST ′0 (p)
from [AAT23, Section 5]. The purpose of this class is the following: as was stated before, we
will deduce further properties of some particular PP-quotients of a group G from a pair (G, X) in
class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) by further studying the inductive step quotients in the construction of a PP-
quotient (the SC-quotients of one such group, as in Proposition 6.1). However, class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 )
is not stable under taking SC-quotients, in the sense that a pair (G,b X)
                                                                        b obtained from a pair (G, X)
               ′
in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) will not be in this class (for example, the space X b will not be a tree and
the parameters will not be bounded as in Definition 2.17 (2’)). Instead, WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ) will, in
fact, be stable under taking SC-quotients as in Proposition 6.1.
Definition 7.2. Let G be a group acting on a δ1 -hyperbolic length space X (where δ1 is the
constant provided by Proposition 6.1). We say that the pair is in class WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ) if it
satisfies the conditions for class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) (Definition 2.17) except that the space X is not
required to be a tree and Condition (2’) is replaced by the following.
   (2”) The tuple (G, X) satisfies the assumptions of Proposition 6.1 for Q = G, τ0 = 5 and family
         of integers N = {p, q1 , q2 }.
7.1. Stability of class WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ) under SC-quotients. The goal of this subsection is to
prove that the newly defined class WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ) is stable under SC-quotients. More concretely,
we will prove the following result, whose purpose is to serve as the inductive step in proving
Proposition 7.1.
Proposition 7.3. Let (G, X) be a pair in class WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ). Let (G, b X)
                                                                                b be the pair obtained
from (G, X) by applying Proposition 6.1 with N = {p, q1 , q2 }, Q the family of all loxodromic
elements of G and by picking the exponent nh for a primitive loxodromic element h of G as follows.
       • If the maximal loxodromic subgroup containing h is D∞ , then nh = p.
       • If the maximal loxodromic subgroup containing h is Z × C2 , then nh = q2 .
       • If the maximal loxodromic subgroup containing h is Z, then nh = q1 .
Then, the pair (G,   b is in class WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ). Furthermore, the quotient map G ↠ G
                  b X)                                                                       b has the
following properties.
     (1) Every involution of G b is the image of an involution of G.
     (2) If F is an elliptic subgroup of G, then the projection map G ↠ G   b induces an isomorphism
         from F onto its image.
                                          (2)
     (3) The image of a pair (r, s) ∈ IG of p-affine (respectively, of p-minimal) type is again of
         p-affine (respectively, of p-minimal) type.
     (4) Let F be a subgroup of G of finite order ≥ 3. Then, the projection map G ↠ G    b induces an
         isomorphism from NG (F ) onto NGb (F ).
                                               b
   For the remainder of this subsection, we fix a pair (G, X) in class WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ) and we let
(G,
  b X)
     b be the pair obtained as in the statement of Proposition 7.3. The remainder of this subsection
is devoted to prove that (G,
                          b X)
                             b indeed has the announced properties.
                 NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                 45


   The following useful result allows us to classify apex stabilizers in the quotient space X.
                                                                                            b
Lemma 7.4. Let vb ∈ vb(Q). The subgroup Stab(b
                                             v ) is isomorphic to one of the following groups:
   • Cq 1 ,
   • Cq2 × C2 ; or
   • Dp .
Proof. The desired result follows directly from Lemma 5.34 and our choice of exponents in Propo-
sition 7.3.                                                                                   □
Remark 7.5. Notice that, since q2 is an odd integer, we have that Cq2 × C2 ∼ = C2q2 . However, we
choose to keep the notation Cq2 × C2 for these apex stabilizers, since it makes more explicit the
geometry of the action of this subgroup on the points of X
                                                         b that are close to vb.
   The next result is an immediate consequence of Proposition 6.1.
Lemma 7.6. The pair (G,
                     b X)
                        b satisfies Condition (1’) of Definition 2.17 and Condition (2”) of
Definition 7.2.
Lemma 7.7. Property (1) of Proposition 7.3 holds: let rb be an involution of G.
                                                                             b Then, rb has a
preimage in G that is an involution.
Proof. This is a consequence of Lemma 5.31 and the fact that ⟨b
                                                              r⟩ cannot contain a strict rotation
(since they all have an order that has a proper odd divisor).                                   □
   The next lemma is again an immediate consequence of Proposition 6.1.
Lemma 7.8. Property (2) of Proposition 7.3 holds: if F is an elliptic subgroup of G, then the
quotient map G ↠ G
                 b induces an isomorphism from F onto its image.

   Now we prove that the pair (G,
                               b X)
                                  b satisfies Condition (3’) of Definition 2.17.

Lemma 7.9. Every element of infinite order of G
                                              b is loxodromic by its action on X.
                                                                               b

Proof. Let gb be an element of infinite order of G.   b Write Fb = ⟨b   g ⟩. Assume towards a contradiction
that F is elliptic.
      b
   Since G is in class WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ), it contains no elliptic element of infinite order, and therefore
Fb cannot lift.
   Thus, by Lemma 5.31 we get that Fb must be contained in Stab(b            v ) for some vb ∈ vb(Q). However,
from Lemma 7.4 we know that no such subgroup contains an element of infinite order, and we
arrive at a contradiction.                                                                                  □
Lemma 7.10. The quotient map G ↠ G       b satisfies Property (4) of Proposition 7.3: let F be a finite
subgroup of G of order at least 3, and let Fb be its image on G.
                                                               b Then the quotient map induces an
isomorphism from NG (F ) onto NGb (Fb)
Proof. By Lemma 4.48, NG (F ) is elliptic, so the quotient map induces an isomorphism from
NG (F ) onto its image E, which is contained in NGb (Fb). Furthermore, Fb is not contained in a strict
reflection group at some apex (since all of them are of order at most 2), and therefore Lemma 5.29
applied to F1 = F2 = F gives that the preimage of NGb (Fb) is a subgroup of NG (F ). From this, the
desired conclusion follows.                                                                         □
   Lemmas 7.11 to 7.14 prove that (G, b X)
                                         b is a weakly sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic
p of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent.
Lemma 7.11. The pair (G,   b X)
                              b satisfies Condition (1) of Definition 2.9: every translation is either
                                                           (2)
                                                 r, sb) ∈ IGb such that rbsb is of order p is either of
of order p or of infinite order, and every pair (b
p-minimal type or of p-affine type.
   Moreover, the following properties hold.
46                                                    MARCO AMELIO

                                                    (2)
       • The image of a pair (r, s) ∈ IG of p-affine (respectively, of p-minimal) type is of p-
         affine (respectively, of p-minimal) type (that is, the quotient map satisfies Property (3) of
         Proposition 7.3).
                            (2)
       • A pair (br, sb) ∈ IGb is of p-affine type if and only if it has a preimage in G of p-affine type,
         and every such preimage is of p-affine type.
                            (2)
Proof. Let (b   r, sb) ∈ IGb be such that rbsb is of finite order. The subgroup Fb = ⟨br, sb⟩ is a finite
dihedral group, and thus it is elliptic by its action on X. If F lifts, then rbsb is of order p (since
                                                              b      b
G is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p). If Fb does not lift, then by Lemma 5.31 it is
contained in Stab(b     v ) for some vb ∈ vb(Q). Now, by Lemma 7.4, the only isomorphism class of apex
stabilizers that contains more than one involution is Dp , and since any two distinct involutions of
Dp generate the whole subgroup, then rbsb is indeed of order p.
                                                                  (2)
   Notice that by Lemma 7.8 the image of a pair (r, s) ∈ IG such that rs has order p is a pair
            (2)
 r, sb) in IGb since r and s generate a finite subgroup.
(b
                           (2)
   Now, let (b  r, sb) ∈ IGb be such that rbsb has order p. Notice first that, since ⟨b             rsb⟩ is characteristic in
Drb,bs , then Drb,bs ≤ NGb (Drb,bs ) ≤ NGb (⟨brsb⟩). Now, by Lemma 4.48 we have that NGb (⟨b                 rsb⟩) is elliptic.
   We claim that NGb (⟨b    rsb⟩) lifts if and only if so does Drb,bs : indeed, if NGb (⟨b         rsb⟩) does not lift, then
by Lemma 5.31 it is a subgroup of Stab(b            v ) for some vb ∈ vb(Q) containing more than one involution,
and the only possible isomorphism class for such a group is Dp . Thus, NGb (⟨b                             rsb⟩) = Drb,bs . In
particular, a pair of distinct involutions of G           b generating a non-lifting dihedral subgroup of order
2p is of p-minimal type.
   Assume now that NGb (⟨b       rsb⟩) lifts to an elliptic subgroup E of G (and therefore, Drb,bs also lifts).
By Lemma 7.10, the quotient map induces an isomorphism from NG (⟨rs⟩) onto NGb (⟨b                               rsb⟩).
                                                  ′
   Now, since (G, X) is in class WST 0 (p, q1 , q2 ), (r, s) is either of p-minimal or of p-affine type.
We immediately obtain from the previous paragraph that (b                     r, sb) is of p-minimal type if and only if
so is (r, s). If (r, s) is of p-affine type, then Dr,s is contained in a finite subgroup H isomorphic to
AGL(1, Fp ). Since H is necessarily elliptic, then the quotient map induces an isomorphism from H
                                                                                                                             (2)
onto its image, and thus (b      r, sb) is of p-affine type. This proves that indeed every pair (b                 r, sb) ∈ IGb
such that rbsb has order p is either of p-affine or of p-minimal type.
   In a similar way to the previous paragraph we can conclude that the image of any pair (r, s) ∈
 (2)
IG of p-affine type is a pair of p-affine type.
   Now, let (r, s) be a pair of p-minimal type, and assume towards a contradiction that the image
(b
 r, sb) is of p-affine type. Let H    b be a subgroup isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ) containing rb and sb. Since
there is no vb ∈ vb(Q) such that H      b is isomorphic to a subgroup of Stab(b            v ), then Hb lifts to a subgroup
H. Let r′ and s′ be the preimages of rb and sb in H. In particular, Dr′ ,s′ is a proper subgroup pf
NG (⟨r′ s′ ⟩). Now, rs and r′ s′ not contained in a loxodromic subgroup of G of dihedral type (since
all of these are isomorphic to D∞ and thus contain no elements of odd order). Thus, by the fourth
property of the quotient map from Proposition 6.1, rs and r′ s′ are conjugate in G (as preimages of
the same element of G),    b so NG (rs) contains an element not in Dr,s , contradicting the assumption
that (r, s) is of p-minimal type. Therefore, (b           r, sb) is itself of p-minimal type.                                 □

                                                                                                    (2)
Lemma 7.12. The group G                                                                   r, sb) ∈ IGb
                           b satisfies Condition (2) of Definition 2.9: the set of pairs (b
of p-affine type is non-empty and Gb acts transitively on it by conjugation.

                                                                                                                     (2)
Proof. Since (G, X) is in class WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ), we have that there is a pair (r, s) ∈ IG of p-
affine type. Let H be the subgroup of G isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ) containing r and s. Since this
subgroup is finite, we have by Lemma 7.8, the quotient map induces an isomorphism from H onto
its image, and thus the image (br, sb) of (r, s) is a pair of p-affine type.
                  NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                     47

                                                   (2)
   Now, let (b           r′ , sb′ ) be pairs of IGb of p-affine type. By Lemma 7.11 the pairs have
             r, sb) and (b
                                                         (2)
preimages (r, s) and (r′ , s′ ) (respectively) in IG , both of p-affine type. The group G is weakly
sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p, so the pairs (r, s) and (r′ , s′ ) are conjugate. Therefore, so
are (b            r′ , sb′ ). Thus, G
      r, sb) and (b                 b acts transitively by conjugation on the pairs of p-affine type of
 (2)
IGb .                                                                                                  □
                                                                                                   (2)
Lemma 7.13. The group G                                                                  r, sb) ∈ IGb
                            b satisfies Condition (3) of Definition 2.9: for every pair (b
                 rsb) is cyclic and generated by a translation.
the subgroup Cen(b
                                    (2)
Proof. Let (b     r, sb) be a pair in IGb .
    If rbsb is of infinite order, by Lemma 7.9 it is loxodromic. Any element centralizing rbsb is contained
in the maximal loxodromic subgroup containing rbsb (and this subgroup itself contains rb and sb). By
the classification of loxodromic subgroups of a tame action (Remark 4.47) the only isomorphism
type of one such group containing more than one involution is D∞ , and in this group, the centralizer
of a translation is cyclic and generated by a translation.
    Now, let rbsb be of order p. By Lemma 4.48 we have that NGb (⟨b                  rsb⟩) is elliptic. Notice that
CenGb (b  rsb) ≤ NGb (⟨b  rsb⟩).
    If NGb (⟨b rsb⟩) lifts, then Cen(brsb) lifts to a subgroup of CenG (rs) (where r and s are the preimages
of rb and sb respectively in the lift of NGb (⟨b    rsb⟩)), which is itself cyclic and generated by a translation
(since G is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p). Since a power of a translation is still a
translation, we get that CenGb (b      rsb) is indeed cyclic and generated by a translation.
    If NGb (⟨b rsb⟩) does not lift, then there is some vb ∈ vb(Q) such that NGb (⟨b         rsb⟩) ≤ Stab(bv ). Now,
NGb (⟨b rsb⟩) contains two distinct involutions rb and sb. By Remark 7.4 the only possible isomorphism
type for Stab(b       v ) containing more than one involution is Dp , and in this subgroup centralizers of
translations are indeed cyclic and generated by a translation.                                                   □
   We finalize the proof of Proposition 7.3 and this subsection with the following lemma.
Lemma 7.14. The group G      b is of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent, i.e., it satisfies Condition (4)
of Definition 2.9: for every subgroup E  b of finite order of G,
                                                              b either E
                                                                       b is contained in a subgroup of
G that embeds into AGL(1, Fp ) or E falls into one of the following cases.
b                                     b
    (1) The subgroup E  b is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to Cq and no non-trivial element
                                                                          1

        of E centralizes an involution.
            b
    (2) The subgroup E  b is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to C2q (and thus every element of
                                                                          2

        E centralizes an involution).
         b

Proof. Let Eb be a subgroup of G   b of finite order. We consider two cases:
   Case 1: the subgroup E    b centralizes an involution rb. Write Fb = ⟨E,
                                                                         b rb⟩. This subgroup is finite
and therefore elliptic by its action on X. We consider two further subcases.
                                           b
   Case 1a: the subgroup Fb lifts. Write F (respectively, E and r) for the lift of Fb (respectively,
of E
   b and rb). Notice that the subgroup E centralizes the involution r. Since G is of (q1 , q2 )-almost
bounded exponent, we get that E is contained in a subgroup H that either embeds into AGL(1, Fp )
or is isomorphic to C2q2 (and thus the same holds for E      b since by Lemma 7.8 the quotient map
induces an isomorphism from H onto its image).
   Case 1b: the subgroup Fb does not lift. By Lemma 5.31 there is some vb ∈ vb(Q) such that Fb is
contained in Stab(b  v ). By Remark 7.4 the only isomorphism types containing involutions are Dp
(which embeds into AGL(1, Fp )) and C2q2 .
   Case 2: the subgroup E    b centralizes no involution. We again consider two further subcases.
   Case 2a: the subgroup E    b lifts. Write E for the preimage of E. b Notice that E centralizes no
involution: if it did centralize an involution r, then ⟨E, r⟩ would be an elliptic subgroup of G and
thus by Lemma 7.8 it would map isomorphically onto its image in G,    b yielding that Eb centralizes an
48                                            MARCO AMELIO


involution. Thus, since G is of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent, we get that E is contained in a
subgroup H that either embeds into AGL(1, Fp ) or is isomorphic to Cq1 (and thus the same holds
for E,
     b since by Lemma 7.8 the quotient map induces an isomorphism from H onto its image).
   Case 2b: the subgroup E    b does not lift. By Lemma 5.31 there is some vb ∈ vb(Q) such that
Eb is contained in Stab(bv ). By Remark 7.4 the only isomorphism types containing elements not
centralizing an involution are Dp (which embeds into AGL(1, Fp )) and Cq1 .                      □
7.2. Stability of the classes under PP-quotients. In this subsection, we will prove Proposition
7.1. Fix for the rest of this subsection a pair (G, X) in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) (see Definition 2.17)
and set Q to be the family of all loxodromic elements of G. We will iteratively apply the quotient
provided by Proposition 7.3 to obtain a quotient group Ḡ as in Theorem 6.7 (with the smaller
constant λ′′ provided by Remark 6.8) and prove the extra properties that were claimed to hold.
These inductive step quotients are in particular SC-quotients as in Proposition 6.1, so in order to
initialize the process, we will consider the pair (G
                                                   b0 , X
                                                        b0 ) with G0 = G and X0 the rescaled version
of X given in the initializing step of Theorem 6.7, so that the pair (G     b0 , Xb0 ) is in fact in class
WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ).
   For every positive integer m we will write (G bm , X
                                                      bm ) for the pair obtained by applying m times
Proposition 7.1. We start with an easy remark that will allow us to lift certain equations in Ḡ to
some intermediate step G  bm .
Remark 7.15. Let ḡ (1) , . . . , ḡ (k) be elements of Ḡ such that ḡ (1) . . . ḡ (k) = 1. Then, there exist
                         (i)                                              (1)           (k)
m ∈ N and preimages gbm of ḡ (i) for 1 ≤ i ≤ k in G      b m such that gbm     . . . gbm = 1.
   Notice first that, since every elliptic element of a group in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ) is of finite order,
then, indeed, every element of Ḡ is of finite order by Consequence (3) of Theorem 6.7 (since we
took Q to be the family of all loxodromic elements of G).
   The next result is a direct application of Remark 7.15.
Lemma 7.16. The quotient map G ↠ Ḡ satisfies Property (1) of Proposition 7.1: every involution
r̄ of Ḡ is the preimage of an involution of G.
Proof. By Remark 7.15, there is some m ∈ N such that a preimage rbm of r̄ in G
                                                                             b m is an involution.
Now, the claim follows from an inductive application of Lemma 7.7.                              □
Lemma 7.17. The quotient map G ↠ Ḡ satisfies Property (2) of Proposition 7.1: let F be an
elliptic subgroup of G. Then G ↠ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from F onto its image.
Proof. This is a direct application of Property (2) of Proposition 7.3 (since then at every step of
the inductive process the map G ↠ G  b m induces an isomorphism from F onto its image Fbm ). □

  The next lemma provides is the key point in the argument for proving Properties (3) and (4) of
Proposition 7.1.
Lemma 7.18. Let F be a finite subgroup of G of order ≥ 3. Then, the quotient map induces an
isomorphism from NG (F ) onto NḠ (F̄ ).
Proof. An inductive application of Property (4) from Proposition 7.3 gives that the quotient map
G ↠ G  b m induces an isomorphism from NG (F ) onto N b (Fbm ). Now, let NG (F ) be the image
                                                             Gm
of NG (F ) in Ḡ (isomorphic to NG (F ) by Lemmas 4.48 and 7.17), and assume that there is some
element ḡ ∈ NḠ (F̄ )\NG (F ). The subgroup ⟨ḡ, F̄ ⟩ is finite and, as such, its multiplication table
is determined by a finite number of equations involving elements of F̄ and powers of ḡ. Thus, by
Remark 7.15 there is some m ∈ N and preimages gbm and Fbm of ḡ and F̄ respectively such that
the quotient map G  b m ↠ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from ⟨b     gm , Fbm ⟩ onto ⟨ḡ, F̄ ⟩. In particular, gbm
normalizes Fbm . Notice that gbm cannot be in the image of NG (F ) in G    b m (since otherwise its image
ḡ would be in NG (F )). Then, we arrive at a contradiction by applying Property (4) of Lemma 7.3
m times.                                                                                                    □
                      NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                                49


Lemma 7.19. The quotient map G ↠ Ḡ satisfies Property (3) of Proposition 7.1: the image of
                 (2)
a pair (r, s) ∈ IG of p-affine (respectively, of p-minimal) type is again of p-affine (respectively, of
                                               (2)
p-minimal) type. Moreover, a pair (r̄, s̄) ∈ IḠ is of p-affine type if and only if every preimage of
                (2)
the pair in IG is of p-affine type.
                         (2)
Proof. Let (r, s) ∈ IG be a pair of p-affine type and let H =     ∼ AGL(1, Fp ) contain r and s. Since
H is finite, it is elliptic, and thus by Lemma 7.17 the quotient map induces an isomorphism from
H onto its image. In particular, the image (r̄, s̄) of the pair (r, s) is itself of p-affine type.
                                        (2)
    Now consider a pair (r, s) ∈ IG of p-minimal type, so that NG (⟨rs⟩) = Dr,s . Denote by
(r̄, s̄) the image of the pair (r, s) in Ḡ. Now, Lemma 7.18 gives that the quotient map induces an
isomorphism from NG (⟨rs⟩) onto NḠ (⟨rs⟩). Now, rs = r̄s̄, and we get thus that NḠ (⟨r̄s̄⟩) is Dr̄,s̄ ,
so the pair (r̄, s̄) is of p-minimal type.
                                          (2)
    Finally, consider a pair (r̄, s̄) ∈ IḠ of p-affine type, and let (r, s) be a preimage of the pair in
 (2)
IG . By the previous paragraph, we know that (r, s) cannot be of p-minimal type. Thus, since
G is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p, (r, s) is either of p-affine type or it generates
an infinite dihedral group. Assume towards a contradiction that we are in this last case. There is
some m ∈ N such that the images rbm and sbm of r and s in G   b m generate an infinite dihedral group,
but the images rbm+1 and sbm+1 of r and s in G b m+1 generate a finite dihedral group isomorphic to
Dp . By Lemma 7.11, we have that (b  rm+1 , sbm+1 ) is of p-minimal type. Now, an argument exactly
as in the previous paragraph yields that the image (r̄, s̄) in Ḡ must be of p-minimal type, and we
arrive at a contradiction.                                                                           □
Lemma 7.20. The quotient map G ↠ Ḡ satisfies Property (4) of Proposition 7.1: let g ∈ G be an
element of finite order ≥ 3, and let ḡ be its image on Ḡ. Then, the projection map G ↠ Ḡ induces
an isomorphism from NG (⟨g⟩) onto NḠ (⟨ḡ⟩) (and thus also from CenG (g) onto CenḠ (ḡ)).
Proof. This is a direct consequence of Lemma 7.18 applied to F = ⟨g⟩.                                                          □
Lemma 7.21. The quotient map G ↠ Ḡ satisfies Property (5) of Proposition 7.1: if G contains
a translation of infinite order and translation length at most 2, then Ḡ contains non-commuting
translations.
                                                       (2)
Proof. Let (r, s) and (r′ , s′ ) be pairs in IG such that (r, s) is of p-affine type and such that r′ s′
is of infinite order and of translation length at most 2. Notice the following fact: by the choice of
λ′′ , in the rescaled space X0 the loxodromic element r′ s′ has translation length ≤ LS δ1 . This has
the following consequence (see the proof of Theorem 6.7): let E ∼                   = D∞ be the maximal loxodromic
                                   ′ ′
subgroup of G containing r s , then the quotient map G ↠ G1 induces an epimorphism E ↠ E
                                                                               b                                              b1 ,
             ∼
where E1 = Dp . Without loss of generality, we may assume that the images rb1 and sb1 of r and
          b                                                                                                    ′      ′    ′

s′ generate E    b1 . Moreover, by Lemma 7.11, the pair (b      r1′ , sb′1 ) is of p-minimal type. In particular, by
an analogous argument to the one in Lemma 7.18 applied to ⟨b                        r1′ sb′1 ⟩ (starting the induction from
                                                            ′ ′
step 1 instead of step 0) we get that the image (r̄ , s̄ ) of this pair in Ḡ is a pair of p-minimal type.
By Lemma 7.19, the image (r̄, s̄) of (r, s) in Ḡ is a pair of p-affine type.
    Assume towards a contradiction that r̄s̄ and r̄′ s̄′ commute. By Remark 7.15, there is m ∈ N
                                                   ′
such that there are preimages rbm , sbm , rbm          and sb′m of r, s, r′ and s′ (respectively) such that all
                                  ′ ′                                        ′
of them are involutions, rbm sbm is of order p (and thus (b                rm  , sb′m ) is of p-minimal type) and the
                               ′ ′
translations rbm sbm and rbm sbm commute. Notice that (b            rm , sbm ) is of p-affine type. Now, G              b m is in
class WST ′0 (p, q1 , q2 ), so the centralizer of a translation is cyclic and generated by a translation.
Since every translation is either of infinite order or of order p, a translation of order p always
                                                                                                  ′ ′
generates its own centralizer. Therefore, the fact that rbm sbm and rbm                             sbm centralize each other
                         ′ ′
implies ⟨b  rm sbm ⟩ = ⟨b
                        rm sbm ⟩. However, we have that NGbm (⟨b          rm sbm ⟩) contains a subgroup isomorphic
                                                                                                ′
to AGL(1, Fp ), and we arrive at a contradiction with the fact that (b                         rm  , sb′m ) is of p-minimal type
                                   ′ ′
(since this imposes NGbm (⟨b     rm sbm ⟩) = Drbm ,bsm ).
                                                ′    ′                                                                         □
50                                             MARCO AMELIO


Lemma 7.22. The quotient map G ↠ Ḡ satisfies Property (6) of Proposition 7.1: if G contains an
element of infinite order that is not a translation, that has translation length 1 and that centralizes
no involution, then Ḡ contains an element of order q1 that is not a translation and centralizes no
involution.
Proof. Let g ∈ G be a loxodromic element satisfying the hypotheses of the lemma. By Remark
4.47, the only possible isomorphism class for the maximal loxodromic subgroup E containing g is
Z. Without loss of generality, we may assume g to be primitive. Notice the following fact: by
the choice of λ′′ , in the rescaled space X0 the element g has translation length ≤ LS δ1 . This has
the following consequence (see the proof of Theorem 6.7): the quotient map G ↠ G                b 1 induces an
epimorphism E ↠ E       b1 , where E b1 ∼
                                        = Cq1 . Moreover, by Lemma 4.48 the normalizer NGb1 (⟨b         g1 ⟩) of
the image ⟨b  g1 ⟩ of ⟨g⟩ on G1 is elliptic, thus by Lemma 5.31 it is contained in Stab(b
                               b                                                                  v) = Eb1 . In
particular, gb1 is not a translation and it centralizes no involution.
   Now, an argument completely analogous to the proof of Lemma 7.18 (with initializing step 1
instead of 0) applied to ⟨b   g1 ⟩ gives that the quotient map G      b 1 ↠ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from
       g1 ⟩) onto NḠ (⟨ḡ⟩). In particular, ḡ is of order q1 , it is not a translation and it centralizes no
NGb1 (⟨b
involution.                                                                                                   □
Lemma 7.23. The quotient map G ↠ Ḡ satisfies Property (7) of Proposition 7.1: if G contains
an element of infinite order (which is not a translation), that has translation length 1 and that
centralizes an involution, then Ḡ contains an element of order q2 which is not a translation and
centralizes an involution.
Proof. Let g ∈ G be a loxodromic element satisfying the hypotheses of the lemma. By Remark
4.47, the only possible isomorphism class for the maximal loxodromic subgroup E containing g is
Z × C2 . Without loss of generality, we may assume g to be primitive. Notice the following fact: by
the choice of λ′′ , in the rescaled space X0 the element g has translation length ≤ LS δ1 . This has
the following consequence (see the proof of Theorem 6.7): the quotient map G ↠ G                b 1 induces an
                       b            b  ∼
epimorphism E ↠ E1 , where E1 = Cq2 × C2 . Moreover, by Lemma 4.48 the normalizer NGb1 (⟨b                 g1 ⟩)
of the image ⟨b g1 ⟩ of ⟨g⟩ on G1 is elliptic, thus by Lemma 5.31 it is contained in Stab(b
                                 b                                                                 v ) = E1 . In
                                                                                                         b
particular, gb1 is not a translation.
   Now, an argument completely analogous to the proof of Lemma 7.18 (with initializing step 1
instead of 0) applied to ⟨b   g1 ⟩ gives that the quotient map G      b 1 ↠ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from
       g1 ⟩) onto NḠ (⟨ḡ⟩). In particular, ḡ is of order q2 , it is not a translation and it centralizes an
NGb1 (⟨b
involution.                                                                                                   □
   It only remains to prove that the group Ḡ is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p and
of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent.
Lemma 7.24. The group Ḡ satisfies Condition (1) of Definition 2.9: every translation of Ḡ is of
                                   (2)
order p and every pair (r̄, s̄) ∈ IḠ is either of p-affine or of p-minimal type.
Proof. The fact that every translation is of order p follows directly from the fact that the pair
(G, X) is in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ), that the family Q is the set of all loxodromic elements of Q and
from the choice of N .
    Let (r̄, s̄) be a pair of distinct involutions such that Dr̄,s̄ is a proper subgroup of NḠ (⟨r̄s̄⟩). Let
            (2)
(r, s) ∈ IG be a preimage of (r̄, s̄) in G. The pair (r, s) cannot be of p-minimal type: otherwise,
by Lemma 7.18 applied to ⟨rs⟩ we would get that (r̄, s̄) is of p-minimal type as well. Assume now
that (r, s) is of infinite order. Then, an argument exactly as in the proof of Lemma 7.19 yields
that the pair (r̄, s̄) is again of p-minimal type.
    Thus, since the group G is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p, we get that the pair
(r, s) has to be of p-affine type. Then, Lemma 7.18 applied to the subgroup ⟨rs⟩ yields that (r̄, s̄)
is of p-affine type.                                                                                       □
                 NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                                    51

                                                                                                              (2)
Lemma 7.25. The group Ḡ satisfies Condition (2) of Definition 2.9: the set of pairs (r̄, s̄) ∈ IḠ
of p-affine type is non-empty and Ḡ acts transitively on it by conjugation.
Proof. Since the group G is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p, the set of pairs of p-
affine type of G is non-empty. Let (r, s) be one such pair, then, by Lemma 7.19, its image (r̄, s̄)
in Ḡ is a pair of p-affine type. Now, let (r̄, s̄) and (r̄′ , s̄′ ) be two pairs of p-affine type. Again,
Lemma 7.19 gives that the pairs have preimages (r, s) and (r′ , s′ ) (respectively) that are pairs of
p-affine type. Since G is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p, there is an element g of
G conjugating (r, s) to (r′ , s′ ), and thus its image ḡ conjugates (r̄, s̄) to (r̄′ , s̄′ ). Therefore, Ḡ acts
                                       (2)
transitively on the set of pairs of IḠ of p-affine type.                                                      □
                                                                                                              (2)
Lemma 7.26. The group Ḡ satisfies Condition (3) of Definition 2.9: for every pair (r̄, s̄) ∈ IḠ
the subgroup Cen(r̄s̄) is cyclic and generated by a translation.
                       (2)
Proof. Let (r̄, s̄) ∈ IḠ .
   If (r̄, s̄) is of p-minimal type, then NḠ (⟨r̄s̄⟩) = Dr̄,s̄ , and then the conclusion follows from the
fact that CenḠ (r̄s̄) ≤ NḠ (⟨r̄s̄⟩) and in Dp centralizers of translations are cyclic and generated by
translations.
                                                   (2)
   If (r̄, s̄) is of p-affine type, let (r, s) ∈ IG be a preimage of (r̄, s̄) on G. By Lemma 7.19,
necessarily (r, s) is of p-affine type. Now, Lemma 7.18 applied to ⟨rs⟩ gives that the quotient map
induces an isomorphism from NG (⟨rs⟩) onto NḠ (⟨r̄s̄⟩) (and thus from CenG (rs) onto CenḠ (r̄s̄)),
and then the desired conclusion follows from the fact that, since G is weakly sharply 2-transitive
of characteristic p, we have that NG (⟨rs⟩) ∼      = AGL(1, Fp ), and in this group a centralizer of a
translation is cyclic and generated by a translation.                                                   □

Lemma 7.27. The group Ḡ satisfies Condition (4) of Definition 2.9: Ḡ is of (q1 , q2 )-almost
bounded exponent. That is, for every subgroup Ē of finite order, either Ē is contained in a subgroup
of Ḡ that embeds into AGL(1, Fp ) or Ē falls into one of the following cases.
    (1) The subgroup Ē is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to Cq1 and no non-trivial element
        of Ē centralizes an involution.
    (2) The subgroup Ē is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to C2q2 (and thus every element of
        Ē centralizes an involution).
Proof. Let Ē be a subgroup of Ḡ of finite order. If Ē is of order 2, then it embeds into AGL(1, Fp ).
    Now, suppose that Ē has finite order at least 3. Assume first that Ē lifts, i.e., that there is a
preimage E of Ē of the same order as Ē. By Lemma 7.18, we have that the quotient map induces
an isomorphism from NG (E) onto NḠ (Ē) (and thus from CenG (E) onto CenḠ (Ē)). The desired
conclusion follows now from the fact that G is of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent.
    Suppose now that Ē does not lift, and let E be a preimage of Ē in G. Notice that E is necessarily
of infinite order: otherwise, by Lemma 7.17, the quotient map would induce an isomorphism from
E onto Ē and thus Ē would lift. Thus, there exists m ∈ N such that the image E              bm of E on
Gb m is of finite order at least 3. Therefore, since Gb m is of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent, E  bm
falls into one of the cases from Condition (4) of Definition 2.9. Now, an argument completely
analogous to the one in the proof of Lemma 7.18 (initialized at step m instead of step 0) gives that
the quotient map G   b m ↠ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from N b (E
                                                                  Gm
                                                                         bm ) onto NḠ (Ē) (and thus also
from CenGbm (E  bm ) onto CenḠ (Ē)), and from this the desired conclusion follows as in the previous
paragraph.                                                                                              □

                                     8. Proof of Proposition 3.1
   The goal of this section is to prove Proposition 3.1. For the sake of completeness, we restate
this result here.
52                                           MARCO AMELIO


Proposition 8.1. Let G be a group in class WST (p, q1 , q2 ) for integers p, q1 and q2 at least n′1 .
                                       (2)
Let (r, s) and (r′ , s′ ) be pairs in IG with (r, s) of p-affine type and (r′ , s′ ) of p-minimal type (so
that both Dr,s and Dr′ ,s′ are isomorphic to Dp ). Then the following holds.
    (1) Let G∗ = G ∗ Z and X the Bass-Serre tree of the splitting of G∗ as an HNN-extension of
         G with trivial associated subgroups. Then, the pair (G∗ , X) is in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ).
    (2) Let G∗ be the following HNN-extension:
                                     ⟨G, t | t−1 rt = r′ , t−1 st = s′ ⟩,
       (an HNN-extension of G with associated subgroups Dr,s and Dr′ ,s′ ). Let X be the Bass-
       Serre tree of this splitting of G∗ . Then, the pair (G∗ , X) is in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ).
Moreover, the group G∗ has the following additional properties.
  (1’) In case (1), G∗ contains a translation of infinite order and translation length at most 2.
  (2’) In case (1), G∗ contains an element of infinite order that is not a translation, that has
       translation length 1 and that centralizes no involution.
  (3’) In case (2), if |Dr,s ∩ Dr′ ,s′ | = 2, then G∗ contains an element of infinite order (which is
       not a translation), that has translation length 1 and that centralizes an involution.
  For the remainder of this section, we fix a group G and pairs (r, s) and (r′ , s′ ) satisfying the
hypotheses of Proposition 8.1. Notice first that it is immediate that the pair (G∗ , X) satisfies
Condition 2.17 of Definition (3’), since elliptic elements are conjugate into the base group G, all of
whose elements have finite order.
  We start by stating the following result, which appeared in [AAT23] as Lemma 6.1.
Lemma 8.2. Let G be a group, and let (K, K ′ ) be a jointly quasi-malnormal pair (see Defini-
tion 2.13) of isomorphic subgroups of G. Let α : K → K ′ be an isomorphism, and consider the
group G∗ = ⟨G, t | tkt−1 = α(k) : k ∈ K⟩. Let X be the corresponding Bass-Serre tree. Then
stabilizers of paths with at least three edges in X have order at most two.
  Notice that Lemma 8.2 applies to both possible HNN-extensions of Proposition 3.4. We begin
by proving some results on the action of G∗ on X that will be useful when proving that G∗ is
weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p.
Lemma 8.3. The action of G∗ on X is acylindrical, non-elementary and tame (so in particular
the pair (G∗ , X) satisfies Condition (1’) of Definition 2.17).
Proof. Acylindricity follows directly from Lemmas 2.14 and 8.2. Moreover, the action is non-
elementary since G∗ is not virtually cyclic.
   For tameness, notice that no loxodromic element g can normalize a subgroup of G∗ of order
greater than 2, since then this element would fix pointwise the axis of g, contradicting Lemma 8.2.
Moreover, G∗ cannot contain a subgroup of order 4 since this would be elliptic and thus conjugate
to a subgroup of order 4 of G, which cannot exist given that this group is in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ):
indeed, a finite subgroup in this class embeds either into Cq1 , into C2q2 or into AGL(1, Fp ), and
none of these groups contains subgroups of order 4 (since q1 and q2 are odd, while AGL(1, Fp ) is
of order p(p − 1) and p ≡ 3 (mod 4)).                                                                □
     This result has the following useful consequence.
Lemma 8.4. Let F be a finite subgroup of G∗ of order at least 3. Then, its normalizer NG∗ (F )
is elliptic.
Proof. This is a direct consequence of Lemmas 4.48 and 8.3.                                             □
Lemma 8.5. The group G∗ satisfies Condition (1) of Definition 2.9: every translation is either
                                                          (2)
of order p or of infinite order, and every pair (r, s) ∈ IG∗ such that rs is of order p is either of
p-minimal type or of p-affine type.
                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF BOUNDED EXPONENT                              53

                      (2)
Proof. Let (r, s) ∈ IG∗ . If rs has finite order, then Dr,s is elliptic by its action on X, and so is
NG∗ (Dr,s ) by Lemma 8.4. Therefore, NG∗ (Dr,s ) is conjugate into the base group G, and since G
is in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ), it follows that rs has order p. Now, by Remark 2.8 (3), the pair (r, s)
is either of p-affine or of p-minimal type.                                                           □
                                                                                                      (2)
Lemma 8.6. The group G∗ satisfies Condition (2) of Definition 2.9: the set of pairs (r, s) ∈ IG∗
of p-affine type is non-empty and G∗ acts transitively on it by conjugation.
Proof. The fact that G∗ has pairs of p-affine type follows from the fact that G embeds into it and
this group is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p.
    Now, let (r, s) ∈ IG∗ and let H ∼
                       (2)
                                         = AGL(1, Fp ) contain r and s. This subgroup is finite, and thus
it is elliptic. In particular, it is conjugate to a subgroup H ′ of G isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ), so
                                            (2)
(r, s) is conjugate to a pair (r′ , s′ ) ∈ IG of p-affine type. Now, the desired conclusion follows from
the fact that G is weakly sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p, and as such it acts transitively
      (2)
on IG .                                                                                                □
                                                                                                      (2)
Lemma 8.7. The group G∗ satisfies Condition (3) of Definition 2.9: for every pair (r, s) ∈ IG∗
the subgroup Cen(rs) is cyclic and generated by a translation.
                     (2)
Proof. Let (r, s) ∈ IG∗ .
   If rs is of order p, then by Lemma 8.4 its centralizer is conjugate into the base group G, where
centralizers of translations are cyclic and generated by a translation.
   If rs is of infinite order, it is loxodromic, and every element of G∗ centralizing rs is in the
maximal loxodromic subgroup E containing rs. Notice that both r and s are also in E. Now, by
Remark 4.47, E is isomorphic to D∞ , since this is the only possible isomorphism type containing
more than one involution, and in this group, centralizers of translations are cyclic and generated
by a translation.                                                                                □
Lemma 8.8. The group G∗ satisfies Condition (4) of Definition 2.9: it is of (q1 , q2 )-almost bounded
exponent, i.e., for every subgroup E of finite order, either E is contained in a subgroup of G∗ that
embeds into AGL(1, Fp ) or E falls into one of the following cases.
    (1) The subgroup E is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to Cq1 and no non-trivial element
        of E centralizes an involution.
    (2) The subgroup E is contained in a subgroup isomorphic to C2q2 (and thus every element of
        E centralizes an involution).
Proof. Let E be a subgroup of finite order.
    If E is of order 2, then E embeds into AGL(1, Fp ).
    If E has order ≥ 3, then by Lemma 8.4 we have that NG∗ (E) (and thus also CenG∗ (E)) is
elliptic and therefore conjugate into G. The desired conclusion follows from the fact that G is of
(q1 , q2 )-almost bounded exponent.                                                             □
  The next lemma finishes the proof that the pair (G∗ , X) is in class WST ′ (p, q1 , q2 ).
Lemma 8.9. The pair (G∗ , X) satisfies Condition (2’) from Definition 2.17: the action is tame
and is such that τ (G∗ , X) ≤ 5 and Ω(G∗ , X) = 0; and the integers p, q1 and q2 are at least n′1 .
Proof. Tameness of the action was proved in Lemma 8.3. The requirements on p, q1 and q2 hold
by assumption (since G is in class WST (p, q1 , q2 )).
  Now, the space X is 0-hyperbolic. Therefore, by Lemma 8.2, the parameters of the definition of
an acylindrical action corresponding to ε = 97δ can be taken to be L = 3 and M = 2 in the case
where the associated subgroups of the HNN-extension are dihedral, or L = M = 1 if the associated
subgroups are trivial. In both cases, by Remark 4.38, we get that ν(G∗ , X) ≤ 5, and thus also by
Definition 4.49 that τ (G∗ , X) ≤ 5.
54                                                MARCO AMELIO


   Finally, for Ω(G∗ , X), notice first that, since our space X is 0-hyperbolic, the axis of an element
g is the set Ag = {x ∈ X : d(x, g · x) = [g]}. Also, since τ = τ (G∗ , X) is finite, we are considering
tuples (g0 , . . . , gτ ) of elements with [gi ] = 0 for all i ∈ {0, . . . , τ } (that is, tuples of elliptic elements)
such that they do not generate an elementary subgroup. In this case, Agi is just the fixed-point set
of gi , and A(g0 , . . . , gτ ) = diam(Ag0 ∩· · ·∩Agτ ) is the diameter of the intersection of their fixed-point
sets. If all these elliptic elements had a fixed point in common, then every element of ⟨g0 , . . . , gτ ⟩
would also fix this point, and therefore, they would generate an elementary subgroup. That is, we
only need to consider tuples (g0 , . . . , gτ ) of elliptic elements such that Ag0 ∩ · · · ∩ Agτ = ∅. Thus,
A(g0 , . . . , gτ ) = 0, and therefore, Ω(G∗ , X) = 0.                                                               □
     Now, we prove that the group G∗ satisfies the extra properties announced in proposition 3.1.
Lemma 8.10. The group G∗ satisfies Property (1’) from Proposition 3.1: in case (1) of the
aforementioned proposition, G∗ contains a translation of infinite order and translation length at
most 2.
Proof. Let t be the stable letter of the HNN-extension and r an involution of G. Consider the
translation g = rt−1 rt. This translation has infinite order (since G∗ is isomorphic to the free
product of G with the infinite cyclic group generated by t). Moreover, this element translates the
vertex v = G fixed by G to the vertex v ′ = gG fixed by gGg −1 . Now, by construction, there is
an edge e = rt−1 r with terminal vertex v ′ = rt−1 rtG and origin vertex v ′′ = rt−1 rG = rt−1 G.
Furthermore, there is an edge e′ = rt−1 with origin vertex v ′′ = rt−1 G and terminal vertex
v = rG = G. Thus, d(v, v ′ ) ≤ 2, and the translation length of g is at most 2.                 □
Lemma 8.11. The group G∗ satisfies Property (2’) from Proposition 3.1: in case (1) of the
aforementioned proposition, G∗ contains an element of infinite order that is not a translation, that
has translation length 1 and that centralizes no involution.
Proof. Let t be the stable letter of the HNN-extension. It is a loxodromic element that cannot
be a translation (since G∗ is isomorphic to the free product of G with the infinite cyclic group
generated by t, loxodromic translations have normal form of length at least 4). Moreover, edge
stabilizers in X are trivial, so the maximal normal finite subgroup of every loxodromic subgroup
is trivial. In particular, t centralizes no involution. Moreover, t translates the vertex v = G to the
vertex v ′ = tG, and these are connected by an edge labelled by the identity. Thus, the translation
length of t is exactly 1.                                                                           □
     The next result completes the proof of Proposition 8.1.
Lemma 8.12. The group G∗ satisfies Property (3’) from Proposition 3.1: in case (2) of the
aforementioned proposition, if |Dr,s ∩ Dr′ ,s′ | = 2, then G∗ contains an element of infinite order
(which is not a translation), that has translation length 1 and that centralizes an involution.
Proof. Without loss of generality, we may assume that |Dr,s ∩ Dr′ ,s′ | = ⟨r′ ⟩. Now, all pairs of
involutions of Dr,s are conjugate by an element of G (since the pair (r, s) is assumed to be of
p-affine type). Thus, up to further conjugating by one such element, we may assume that one of
the defining relations of the HNN-extension is t−1 r′ t = r′ .
   Now, the element t is loxodromic and it translates the vertex v = G to the vertex v ′ = tG.
These vertices are connected by an edge labelled by the identity. Thus, the translation length of t
is exactly 1, and the desired conclusion follows.                                                □

                                                   References
[AAT23]      Marco Amelio, Simon André, and Katrin Tent. Non-split sharply 2-transitive groups
             of odd positive characteristic. Accepted for publication in International Mathematics
             Research Notices. 2023. arXiv: 2312.16992 [math.GR].
                                          REFERENCES                                            55


[AD08]   Goulnara Arzhantseva and Thomas Delzant. “Examples of random groups”. In: preprint
         2011 (2008).
[Adi79]  S. I. Adian. The Burnside problem and identities in groups. Translated from the Russian
         by John Lennox and James Wiegold. English. Vol. 95. Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb. Springer-
         Verlag, Berlin, 1979.
[AG22]   Simon André and Vincent Guirardel. “Finitely generated simple sharply 2-transitive
         groups”. In: (2022). arXiv: 2212.06020 [math.GR].
[ART23] Agatha Atkarskaya, Eliyahu Rips, and Katrin Tent. The Burnside problem for odd
         exponents. 2023. arXiv: 2303.15997 [math.GR].
[AT23]   Simon André and Katrin Tent. “Simple sharply 2-transitive groups”. In: Trans. Amer.
         Math. Soc. 376.6 (2023), pp. 3965–3993. issn: 0002-9947,1088-6850. doi: 10 . 1090 /
         tran/8846. url: https://doi.org/10.1090/tran/8846.
[BBI22]  Dmitri Burago, Yuri Burago, and Sergei Ivanov. A course in metric geometry. Vol. 33.
         American Mathematical Society, 2022.
[BH13]   Martin R Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature. Vol. 319.
         Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[Bow08] Brian H Bowditch. “Tight geodesics in the curve complex”. In: Inventiones mathematicae
         171.2 (2008), pp. 281–300.
[Bur02]  William Burnside. “On an unsettled question in the theory of discontinuous groups”.
         In: Quart. J. Pure and Appl. Math. 33 (1902), pp. 230–238.
[CDP06] Michel Coornaert, Thomas Delzant, and Athanase Papadopoulos. Géométrie et théorie
         des groupes: les groupes hyperboliques de Gromov. Vol. 1441. Springer, 2006.
[CLC13] Serge Cantat, Stéphane Lamy, and Yves de Cornulier. “Normal subgroups in the Cre-
         mona group”. English. In: Acta Math. 210.1 (2013), pp. 31–94. issn: 0001-5962. doi:
         10.1007/s11511-013-0090-1.
[Cou11]  Rémi Coulon. “Asphericity and small cancellation theory for rotation families of groups”.
         In: Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics 5.4 (2011), pp. 729–765.
[Cou14]  Rémi Coulon. “On the geometry of Burnside quotients of torsion free hyperbolic groups”.
         In: International Journal of Algebra and Computation 24.03 (2014), pp. 251–345.
[Cou16a] Rémi Coulon. Small cancellation theory: a geometric approach (after F. Dahmani, V.
         Guirardel, D. Osin, and S. Cantat, S. Lamy). French. Paris: Société Mathématique de
         France (SMF), 2016, 1–33, ex. isbn: 978-2-85629-836-7.
[Cou16b] Rémi B Coulon. “Partial periodic quotients of groups acting on a hyperbolic space”. In:
         Annales de l’Institut Fourier. Vol. 66. 5. 2016, pp. 1773–1857.
[Cou21]  Rémi Coulon. Infinite periodic groups of even exponents. 2021. arXiv: 1810 . 08372
         [math.GR].
[DG08]   Thomas Delzant and Misha Gromov. “Mesoscopic curvature and very small cancellation
         theory. (Courbure mésoscopique et théorie de la toute petite simplification.)” French.
         In: J. Topol. 1.4 (2008), pp. 804–836. issn: 1753-8416. doi: 10.1112/jtopol/jtn023.
[DGO17] François Dahmani, Vincent Guirardel, and Denis Osin. Hyperbolically embedded sub-
         groups and rotating families in groups acting on hyperbolic spaces. Vol. 245. 1156. Amer-
         ican Mathematical Society, 2017.
[DK18]   Cornelia Druţu and Michael Kapovich. Geometric group theory. Vol. 63. American
         Mathematical Soc., 2018.
[Gro01]  Misha Gromov. Mesoscopic curvature and hyperbolicity. English. Providence, RI: Amer-
         ican Mathematical Society (AMS), 2001, pp. 58–69. isbn: 0-8218-2750-2.
[HO16]   Michael Hull and Denis Osin. “Transitivity degrees of countable groups and acylindrical
         hyperbolicity”. In: Israel Journal of Mathematics 216.1 (2016), pp. 307–353.
[Iva92]  Sergei V. Ivanov. “On the Burnside problem on periodic groups”. English. In: Bull. Am.
         Math. Soc., New Ser. 27.2 (1992), pp. 257–260. issn: 0273-0979. doi: 10.1090/S0273-
         0979-1992-00305-1.
56                                          REFERENCES


[Iva94]     Sergei V Ivanov. “The free Burnside groups of sufficiently large exponents”. In: Inter-
            national Journal of Algebra and Computation 4.01n02 (1994), pp. 1–308.
[Jab18]     Enrico Jabara. “On sharply 2-transitive groups with point stabilizer of exponent 2 n.
            3”. In: Communications in Algebra 46.2 (2018), pp. 544–551.
[Jor72]     Camille Jordan. “Recherches sur les substitutions”. In: Journal de Mathématiques Pures
            et Appliquées 17 (1872), pp. 351–367.
[Ker74]     William Kerby. On infinite sharply multiply transitive groups. 6. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
            1974.
[KM14]      EI Khukhro and VD Mazurov. “Unsolved problems in group theory. The Kourovka
            notebook”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.0300 (2014).
[Lys96]     I. G. Lysenok. “Infinite Burnside groups of even exponent”. English. In: Izv. Math. 60.3
            (1996), pp. 453–654. issn: 1064-5632. doi: 10.1070/IM1996v060n03ABEH000077.
[May06]     Peter Mayr. “Sharply 2-transitive groups with point stabilizer of exponent 3 or 6”. In:
            Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society 134.1 (2006), pp. 9–13.
[Maz90]     VD Mazurov. “2-Transitive permutation groups”. In: Siberian Mathematical Journal
            31.4 (1990), pp. 615–617.
[NA69]      P. S. Novikov and S. I. Adyan. “On infinite periodic groups. I–III”. English. In: Math.
            USSR, Izv. 2 (1969), pp. 209–236, 241–480, 665–685. issn: 0025-5726. doi: 10.1070/
            IM1968v002n01ABEH000637.
[Neu40]     Bernhard Hermann Neumann. “On the commutativity of addition”. In: Journal of the
            London Mathematical Society 1.3 (1940), pp. 203–208.
[Ols89]     A Yu Olshansky. “Geometriya opredelyayushchikh sootnosheniy v gruppakh [Geometry
            of defining relations in groups]”. In: M.: Nauka (1989).
[Osi16]     Denis Osin. “Acylindrically hyperbolic groups”. In: Transactions of the American Math-
            ematical Society 368.2 (2016), pp. 851–888.
[RST17]     Eliyahu Rips, Yoav Segev, and Katrin Tent. “A sharply 2-transitive group without
            a non-trivial abelian normal subgroup”. In: J. Eur. Math. Soc.(JEMS) 19.10 (2017),
            pp. 2895–2910.
[RT19]      Eliyahu Rips and Katrin Tent. “Sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic 0”. In:
            Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik (Crelles Journal) 2019.750 (2019),
            pp. 227–238.
[Sel97]     Zlil Sela. “Acylindrical accessibility for groups”. English. In: Invent. Math. 129.3 (1997),
            pp. 527–565. issn: 0020-9910. doi: 10.1007/s002220050172.
[Suc01]     Nikolai Mikhailovich Suchkov. “Finiteness of some sharply doubly transitive groups”.
            In: Algebra and Logic 40.3 (2001), pp. 190–193.
[Ten16]     Katrin Tent. “Infinite sharply multiply transitive groups”. In: Jahresbericht der Deutschen
            Mathematiker-Vereinigung 118.2 (2016), pp. 75–85.
[Tit52]     Jacques Tits. “Généralisations des groupes projectifs basées sur leurs propriétés de
            transitivité”. In: Mémoires de la Classe des Sciences 27 (1952).
[TZ12]      Katrin Tent and Martin Ziegler. A course in model theory. 40. Cambridge University
            Press, 2012.
[Zas35a]    Hans Zassenhaus. “Kennzeichnung endlicher linearer Gruppen als Permutationsgrup-
            pen”. In: Abhandlungen aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Universität Hamburg.
            Vol. 11. Springer. 1935, pp. 17–40.
[Zas35b]    Hans Zassenhaus. “Über endliche Fastkörper”. In: Abhandlungen aus dem mathematis-
            chen Seminar der Universität Hamburg. Vol. 11. Springer. 1935, pp. 187–220.



     Marco Amelio
     Universität Münster
     Einsteinstraße 62
                                    REFERENCES   57


48149 Münster, Germany.
E-mail address: mamelio@uni-muenster.de
