                                                NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE
                                                                   CHARACTERISTIC

                                                                     MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


                                                   Abstract. It is well-known that every sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic 3 splits.
arXiv:2312.16992v1 [math.GR] 28 Dec 2023




                                                   Here we construct the first examples of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups in odd positive
                                                   characteristic p, for sufficiently large primes p. Furthermore, we show that any group without
                                                   2-torsion can be embedded into a non-split sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p for
                                                   all sufficiently large primes p, yielding 2ℵ0 many pairwise non-isomorphic countable non-split
                                                   sharply 2-transitive groups in any sufficiently large characteristic.




                                                                                       1. Introduction

                                              Let n ≥ 1 be an integer, and let G be a group acting on a set X with at least n elements. The
                                           action is said to be sharply n-transitive if for any two n-tuples of distinct elements (x1 , . . . , xn )
                                           and (y1 , . . . , yn ) of X n there exists a unique element g ∈ G such that g · xi = yi for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. A
                                           group G is called sharply n-transitive if there is a set X with at least n elements on which G acts
                                           sharply n-transitively.
                                              Clearly every group acts sharply 1-transitively on itself by left multiplication. On the other
                                           hand, for n ≥ 4, there are only ﬁnitely many sharply n-transitive groups, and moreover these
                                           groups are necessarily ﬁnite and completely classiﬁed. Indeed, Jordan proved in [Jor72] that the
                                           only ﬁnite sharply n-transitive groups for n ≥ 4 are the symmetric groups Sn and Sn+1 , the
                                           alternating group An+2 , and the Mathieu groups M11 and M12 for the cases n = 4 and n = 5
                                           respectively. Furthermore, Tits proved in [Tit52, Chapitre IV, Théorème I] that there are no
                                           inﬁnite sharply n-transitive groups for n ≥ 4. Zassenhaus gave a complete classiﬁcation of the
                                           ﬁnite sharply n-transitive groups for the cases n = 2 and n = 3 in [Zas35a] and [Zas35b]. For
                                           n = 2 and n = 3 there do exist also inﬁnite sharply n-transitive groups: for a skew-ﬁeld K, the
                                           aﬃne group AGL(1, K) ∼         = K+ ⋊ K ∗ acts sharply 2-transitively on K, and for any (commutative)
                                           ﬁeld K, the projective linear group P GL(2, K) acts sharply 3-transitively on the projective line.
                                           These groups are inﬁnite whenever K is inﬁnite.
                                              Until recently, it was an open question whether a sharply 2-transitive group G necessarily splits
                                           in the form A ⋊ H for some non-trivial normal abelian subgroup A (in which case we simply say
                                           that G is split ). The ﬁrst examples of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups were exhibited by Rips,
                                           Segev and Tent in [RST17] and by Rips and Tent in [RT19]. Then, the ﬁrst examples of inﬁnite
                                           simple sharply 2-transitive groups were constructed by André and Tent in [AT23] and by André
                                           and Guirardel in [AG22] (with additional properties, in particular ﬁnite generation).
                                              An important feature associated with a sharply 2-transitive group action is its characteristic,
                                           which we deﬁne as follows. Recall that an element of order 2 in a group is called an involution,
                                           and a product of two distinct involutions will be called a translation. Let G y X be a sharply 2-
                                           transitive group action. It is easy to see that G has involutions, and that involutions form a unique
                                           conjugacy class. Moreover, if involutions have ﬁxed points, the action G y X is G-equivariant

                                              Date: December 29, 2023.
                                              The first and third authors, and the second author until September 2023, were supported by the German
                                           Research Foundation (DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy EXC 2044–390685587, Mathematics Münster:
                                           Dynamics–Geometry–Structure and by CRC 1442 Geometry: Deformations and Rigidity.
                                                                                                 1
2                              MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


to the action of G by conjugation on the set of involutions of G, and therefore the translations
form a conjugacy class. In this case we deﬁne the characteristic of G y X to be the order of
a translation if this order is ﬁnite (in which case it is necessarily a prime number ≥ 3), or as 0
in case this order is inﬁnite. If involutions have no ﬁxed points, we say that the action G y X
has characteristic 2. Thus, sharply 2-transitive group actions in characteristic 2 are fundamentally
diﬀerent from those in other characteristics (note in particular that the examples in [RST17] show
that in characteristic 2 the action by conjugation of G on itself need not be 2-transitive on the class
of involutions). Notice that when K is a ﬁeld, the characteristic of AGL(1, K) y K coincides with
that of K in the usual sense. We often say that the group G is sharply 2-transitive of characteristic
p without referring to the underlying action G y X; this is not ambiguous in characteristic 6= 2
since the underlying action is unique (up to G-equivariant bijection).
   The examples in [RST17] (in characteristic 2) and in [RT19; AT23; AG22] (in characteristic
0) show the class of sharply 2-transitive groups to be wild. By a well-known result due to Kerby
(see [Ker74, Theorem 9.5]) every sharply 2-transitive group in characterstic 3 splits. On the other
hand, the question of the existence of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups in characteristic p > 3,
which we address in this paper for any prime p suﬃciently large, had remained completely open
until now.
   The main diﬃculty in constructing non-split sharply 2-transitive groups in characteristic p > 3
comes from the fact that the methods used so far in order to construct non-split sharply 2-transitive
groups have proceeded through HNN-extensions, which create translations of inﬁnite order. There-
fore, since all the translations have order p in a sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p > 2,
in order to obtain sharply 2-transitive groups in characteristic p, we will have to add new relations
of the form (ij)p = 1 for distinct involutions i, j. This will be achieved by taking small cancellation
quotients similar to the quotients used in the solution of the famous Burnside problem about the
existence of inﬁnite ﬁnitely generated groups of ﬁnite exponent (posed by Burnside in [Bur02]), in
order to guarantee that any translation has order p. This makes the construction in odd positive
characteristic considerably more complicated than in characteristic 2 and 0. Moreover, it is worth
pointing out that the construction of inﬁnite ﬁnitely generated groups of even exponent is noto-
riously more diﬃcult than the construction of inﬁnite ﬁnitely generated groups of odd exponent,
due to the presence of involutions. As already observed above, sharply 2-transitive groups contain
plenty of involutions, and one of the challenges we have to face is to keep these involutions under
control when taking small cancellation quotients. We then obtain the following result (see Theorem
2.17 and Corollary 2.18 for stronger versions of this statement, in particular the existence of 2ℵ0
many pairwise non-isomorphic countable non-split sharply 2-transitive groups in any characteristic
p ≥ p′ ).
Theorem 1.1. There exists a prime number p′ such that any group without 2-torsion embeds into
a non-split sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p, for every prime number p ≥ p′ .
    The methods used in this article, based on Coulon’s paper [Cou16b], will necessarily yield a
very large value for p′ . The existence of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic p for
small values of p ≥ 5 remains an open question and seems to bear similarities to the famous open
question of the existence of ﬁnitely generated inﬁnite groups of small ﬁnite exponent.
    As a side-remark we note that being a non-split sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic
p 6= 2 is expressible by a ﬁrst-order sentence in the language of groups. Hence by the Compactness
Theorem, we recover the existence of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic 0 as a
consequence of Theorem 1.1.

    Note that a group could a priori be simultaneously of characteristic 2 and p 6= 2 (although there are no known
examples).
    However, the strategy of the proof in positive characteristic is based on the strategy used in [RT19] in charac-
teristic 0, with additional work to obtain translations of finite order. So this does not actually yield a new proof in
characteristic 0.
          NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                      3


   Note that any group embeds into a non-split sharply sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic
2 and that any group not containing 2-torsion can be embedded into a non-split sharply 2-transitive
group of characteristic 0, and even in the centralizer of an involution in such a group (see [AT23]).
Theorem 1.1 shows that a similar phenomenon occurs in (large) prime characteristic.
   The proof of our main result has its roots in [RT19], but a new step has to be added in the
iterative construction in order to solve the diﬃculty mentioned above: given a group action with
trivial 2-point stabilizers we inductively consider HNN-extensions to obtain a sharply 2-transitive
action, but the main point of the paper is concerned with the diﬃculty of taking the appropriate
quotients to obtain positive characteristic p by killing p-powers of products of distinct involutions
of inﬁnite order, for some uniform prime p.

Structure of the paper. In Section 2 we deﬁne two classes of groups that form the framework
for our construction, and we give the proof of Theorem 1.1 (and more generally of Theorem 2.17
and Corollary 2.18), assuming two technical propositions whose proofs are postponed to Sections
5 and 6. In Section 3 we recall background on hyperbolic metric spaces and on actions of groups
by isometries on these spaces. Although most of the deﬁnitions and results given in this section
are well-known in the context of geodesic metric spaces, we have to work in the more general
context of length metric spaces, and we explain how to adapt the proofs when necessary (see also
Appendix A). Then, in Section 4, we introduce the geometric small cancellation methods that will
be crucial to prove Theorem 1.1. These geometric small cancellation methods were introduced by
Gromov in [Gro01], and further developed by Delzant and Gromov in [DG08], and then notably
by Arzhantseva and Delzant in [AD08], by Coulon in [Cou11; Cou14; Cou16b], by Cantat and
Lamy in [CLC13] (to prove that the Cremona group is not simple) and by Dahmani, Guirardel
and Osin in [DGO17]; see also [Cou16a]. These methods proved useful to create various exotic
quotients of groups exhibiting some kind of negative curvature, among which Burnside quotients
of hyperbolic groups (i.e. inﬁnite quotients of hyperbolic groups of ﬁnite exponent). In particular,
these methods were used to answer the Burnside problem, originally solved by Adian and Novikov
in [NA69] by means of complicated combinatorial techniques (see also [Adi79; Ols89; Iva92; Lys96;
DG08; Cou14; Cou21; ART23]).

Acknowledgement. For the Burnside quotients we use results from [Cou16b] and we are very
grateful to Rémi Coulon for several helpful conversations and for his enthusiasm for this project.

                        2. Preliminaries and outline of the proof
   We start by ﬁxing some notation and terminology. Recall that for a group G, an involution is
an element r ∈ G of order two, and a translation is a product rs ∈ G of two distinct involutions r
and s. For an element g ∈ G, we write |g| for its order. We will use the following convention: for
g, h ∈ G, the conjugate of h by g is g −1 hg. In this paper, a pair of elements or of subgroups of a
group G always refers to an ordered pair.
Notation. Let G be a group and S ⊆ G an arbitrary subset.
    • We write I(S) = {r : r ∈ S, |r| = 2} for the set of involutions of S.
    • We write T r(S) = {rs : rs ∈ S, r, s ∈ I(G), r 6= s} for the set of translations of S.
    • We write I(S)(2) = {(r, s) : r, s ∈ I(S), r 6= s} for the set of (ordered) pairs of distinct
      involutions of S.
    • For involutions r 6= s of G, we write Dr,s = hr, si (note that this group is dihedral of order
      2|rs|, possibly inﬁnite).
    • We write O(G) for the set of natural numbers that are orders of elements of G, that is,
                                O(G) = {n ∈ N : ∃g ∈ G , |g| = n}.
Note that the sets I(G) and T r(G) are invariant under conjugation. Note also that I(S) = I(G)∩S
and T r(S) = T r(G) ∩ S.
4                          MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


   Given a sharply 2-transitive group action G y X, it is easy to see that the set I(G) is non-
empty: for any pair of distinct points x, y ∈ X, there is an element r of G swapping x and y. Since
r2 ﬁxes both x and y, by the uniqueness condition we must have r2 = 1. Similarly, it is easy to see
that all involutions are conjugate. In particular, either every involution has a (necessarily unique)
ﬁxed point, or no involution has a ﬁxed point.
   If G acts sharply 2-transitively on a set X such that involutions of G have ﬁxed points, there is
a G-equivariant bijection I(G) −→ X given by r 7−→ Fix(r), where G acts on I(G) by conjugation
(see e.g. Lemma 3.1 in [Ten16]).
   Hence, if involutions in a sharply 2-transitive group have ﬁxed points, we may assume that the
group acts by conjugation on its set of involutions. An immediate consequence of this lemma is
the fact that in a sharply 2-transitive group where involutions have ﬁxed points, all translations
are conjugate. Recall that in this case we deﬁne the characteristic of a sharply 2-transitive group
in relation to the order of translations (we refer to the introduction).
   Notice that the characteristic of a sharply 2-transitive group is necessarily 0 or a prime number
p (since otherwise the subgroup generated by a translation t of order m · m′ with m, m′ > 1 would
contain a translation of order m that cannot be conjugate to t) and the case p = 2 occurs if and
only if involutions are ﬁxed-point free (since two involutions with diﬀerent ﬁxed points cannot
commute).
   From now on, for a prime number p we will write Fp for the ﬁnite ﬁeld with p elements. Also,
for n ≥ 2 we will write Cn for the cyclic group of order n and Dn for the dihedral group of order
2n, that is, the group given by the presentation
                            Dn = hr, s | r2 = s2 = (rs)n = 1i =∼ Cn ⋊ C2 .
   We now introduce two classes, denoted ST (p) and ST ′ (p), which will be used in the construction
of groups as in Theorem 1.1. The conditions for the class of groups ST (p) are comparable to
those for the classes considered in [RT19; AT23; AG22], but in order to take small cancellation
quotients as explained in the introduction, we will introduce a class ST ′ (p) whose elements are
pairs composed of a group G and a tree X endowed with an action of G satisfying a number of
technical assumptions that will allow us to apply the results from [Cou16b].
Notation. Given a subgroup H of a group G, we write NG (H) for the normalizer of H in G, and
Cen(g) for the centralizer of an element g in G.
Definition 2.1. Let G be a group, (r, s) a pair in I(G)(2) , p an odd prime number.
     • We say that (r, s) is a pair of p-minimal type if |rs| = p and NG (hrsi) = Dr,s .
     • We say that (r, s) is a pair of p-affine type if Dr,s is contained in a subgroup H of G
       isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ).
Remark 2.2. It is not hard to see that AGL(1, Fp ) has a unique subgroup D isomorphic to Dp ,
and that I(D) = I(AGL(1, Fp )). Therefore, the isomorphism between H (as in Deﬁnition 2.1)
and AGL(1, Fp ) induces an isomorphism between Dr,s and D. It follows that H normalizes Dr,s
and that H acts sharply 2-transitively on I(Dr,s ) = I(H) by conjugation. Note in particular that
|rs| = p. Moreover, if (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) is of p-aﬃne type and no nontrivial element of G centralizes
both r and s, then in fact NG (Dr,s ) coincides with H, and thus is isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ), since
the subgroup H ⊆ NG (Dr,s ) acts already 2-transitively by conjugation on I(Dr,s ) .
Remark 2.3. Clearly, if (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) is of p-minimal type (respectively, of p-aﬃne type), then
so is every conjugate of (r, s).
Definition 2.4. Let G be a group, p be an odd prime number. We will say that G is almost
sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p if it satisﬁes the following conditions.
    (1) Every translation is either of order p or of inﬁnite order, and every pair (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2)
        such that rs is of order p is either of p-minimal type or of p-aﬃne type.
    (2) The (normal) subgroup N = hT r(G)i contains no involution.
           NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                          5


    (3) The set of pairs (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) of p-aﬃne type is non-empty and G acts transitively on it
        by conjugation.
    (4) For every pair (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) the subgroup Cen(rs) is cyclic and generated by a transla-
        tion.
Remark 2.5. If G is an almost sharply 2-transitive group of of characteristic p, Condition (3)
implies that I(G) is non-empty. Condition (1) implies that no two distinct involutions commute
(that would yield a translation of order 2). In addition, by Condition (4) no non-trivial element of
G centralizes two distinct involutions: suppose one such g ∈ G centralizes involutions r 6= s ∈ I(G).
Then g ∈ Cen(rs) = hhi for some h ∈ G. If rs has order p, we can choose h = rs and we see that
rgr−1 = g −1 6= g, a contradiction. Otherwise rs has inﬁnite order and we have g m ∈ hrsi ⊂ Cen(rs)
for some m ∈ Z∗ , so again rg m r−1 = g −m 6= g m , a contradiction.
   We now introduce the concept of a quasi-malnormal pair of subgroups of a given group, and
we relate in Lemma 2.7 this concept to the case where the subgroups in consideration are ﬁnite
dihedral of order 2p.
Definition 2.6. Let G be a group. A subgroup K of G is said to be quasi-malnormal if for all
g ∈ G\K we have |K ∩g −1 Kg| ≤ 2. A pair of subgroups (K, K ′ ) of G is said to be quasi-malnormal
if K is quasi-malnormal and for all g ∈ G we have |K ∩ g −1 K ′ g| ≤ 2.
Lemma 2.7. Let G a group. Let (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) be a pair of p-minimal type and (r′ , s′ ) ∈ I(G)(2)
be a pair of p-affine type. Then the pair (Dr,s , Dr′ ,s′ ) is quasi-malnormal.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove that Dr,s is quasi-malnormal. Suppose that there is some g ∈ G\Dr,s such
that |Dr,s ∩ (g −1 Dr,s g)| > 2. Then, this intersection must have order p or 2p, and in any case
both subgroups have the same translations, that is, hrsi = g −1 hrsig. Namely, g normalizes hrsi,
contradicting the assumption that (r, s) is a pair of p-minimal type.
   Then, let us prove that Dr,s ∩ (g −1 Dr′ ,s′ g) has order at most 2. Assume towards a contradiction
that |Dr,s ∩ g −1 Dr′ ,s′ g| > 2. Since a conjugate of a pair of p-aﬃne type is still of p-aﬃne type, we
can assume without loss of generality that g = 1. Then hrsi = hr′ s′ i. But hr′ s′ i is a characteristic
subgroup of Dr′ ,s′ , so the subgroup H ∼   = AGL(1, Fp ) of NG (Dr′ ,s′ ) also normalizes hr′ s′ i = hrsi,
contradicting the assumption that (r, s) is a pair of p-minimal type.                                    
Remark 2.8. In fact, a pair (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) is of p-minimal type if and only if the subgroup Dr,s
is quasi-malnormal. Indeed, if there exists some g ∈ NG (hrsi)\Dr,s , then Dr,s ∩ (g −1 Dr,s g) has
order at least p and thus Dr,s is not quasi-malnormal.
  Now we are ready to introduce the class ST (p).
Definition 2.9 (Class ST (p)). Let G be a group. We will say that G belongs to the class ST (p) if
it is almost sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p with all translations of order p (i.e. no translation
has inﬁnite order).
Remark 2.10. Clearly AGL(1, Fp ) ∈ ST (p), so in particular this class is non-empty. Furthermore,
if G is in ST (p) and every pair (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) is of p-aﬃne type, then G is sharply 2-transitive of
characteristic p 6= 2.
   Our construction of non-split sharply 2-transitive groups starts from a group in ST (p) and
proceeds inductively by using HNN-extensions to conjugate pairs of p-minimal type to pairs of
p-aﬃne type. Furthermore, we will prove that the sharply 2-transitive groups that we construct
contain non-commuting translations. The following theorem implies that these groups will not
split.
Theorem 2.11 (see [Neu40]). Let G be a sharply 2-transitive group. Then G splits if and only
if T r(G) ∪ {1} is an abelian subgroup (which is normal since the set of translations is invariant
under conjugation).
6                           MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


    The cornerstone of the inductive process is the following result.
Proposition 2.12. Let p be an odd prime number and let G be an almost sharply 2-transitive
group of characteristic p.
    (1) Let (r, s), (r′ , s′ ) ∈ I(G)(2) with (r, s) of p-affine type, and (r′ , s′ ) of p-minimal type, so
        Dr,s and Dr′ ,s′ are isomorphic to Dp . Then the HNN-extension
                                  G∗ = hG, t | t−1 rt = r′ , t−1 st = s′ i
         is almost sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p.
     (2) Let H be a non-trivial group without 2-torsion. Then G∗ = G ∗ H is almost sharply
         2-transitive of characteristic p.
   However, in both cases of Proposition 2.12, even if G ∈ ST (p), we have G∗ ∈    / ST (p) since G∗
contains translations of inﬁnite order. Thus, in order to eventually obtain a sharply 2-transitive
group of characteristic p, in particular a group where all translations have order p, we need to take
partial periodic quotients (see Theorem 4.28) of the (normal) subgroup generated by translations.
To that purpose, we now introduce a new class ST ′ (p). Deﬁnition 2.13 below involves Theorem
4.28, which is stated together with the necessary background in Section 4 following work of Coulon
(see [Cou16b]).
Definition 2.13 (Class ST ′ (p)). Let G be a group acting by isometries on a (simplicial) tree X.
Write N = hT r(G)i and Q = T r(G). We say that (G, X) belongs to the class ST ′ (p) if G is almost
sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p and the following conditions are satisﬁed.
   (1’) The action of G on X is non-elementary and acylindrical (see Deﬁnition 3.28), and thus it
        is WPD (see Deﬁnition 3.31).
   (2’) The action is such that e(N, X) = 1, rinj (Q, X) ≥ 1, ν(N, X) ≤ 5 and A(N, X) = 0
        (see Subsection 4.1 for the deﬁnitions of the parameters), and the prime number p is at
        least n1 (the constant provided by Theorem 4.28 for these values of the parameters and
        hyperbolicity constant δ = 0).
   (3’) Every translation of inﬁnite order is loxodromic for its action on X.
   (4’) A ﬁnite subgroup of G normalized by a loxodromic element has order at most 2.
   We will sometimes say that G belongs to the class ST ′ (p) with no mention of the space X if
this is not necessary. We will prove in Section 5 that a group in class ST ′ (p) in fact satisﬁes the
hypotheses of Theorem 4.28 (that is, that the family Q is strongly stable, see Deﬁnition 4.26).
   We will show in Section 6 the following reﬁnement of Proposition 2.12.
Proposition 2.14. If G ∈ ST (p), then for G∗ as in Proposition 2.12 we have (G∗ , X) ∈ ST ′ (p)
where X is the Bass-Serre tree associated with the decomposition of G∗ as an HNN-extension or
as a free product.
   This allows us to take appropriate quotients to return to ST (p). Namely, we will show in Section
5 the following result.
Proposition 2.15. If (G, X) belongs to ST ′ (p), then G has a quotient Ḡ ∈ ST (p) such that the
images of pairs of distinct involutions of p-affine type (respectively, of p-minimal type) will again
be of p-affine type (respectively, of p-minimal type), any subgroup of G that is elliptic for the action
on X projects to an isomorphic image in Ḡ, and O(G) = O(Ḡ).
    We will need the following easy observation.
Remark 2.16. Notice that if a group G is the union of an inﬁnite chain of subgroups Hm , m ∈ N,
all of them belonging to the class ST (p), then so does G. Moreover, if for all m, m′ ∈ N we have
O(Hm ) = O(Hm′ ), then O(G) = O(H0 ).
   Propositions 2.14 and 2.15 are the tools used in the proof our main result, i.e. the following
stronger version of Theorem 1.1.
           NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                            7


Theorem 2.17 (The Embedding Theorem). There exists a prime number p′ with the following
property. If G ∈ ST (p) for a prime number p ≥ p′ and if H has no 2-torsion, then G and H embed
into a non-split sharply 2-transitive group G of characteristic p with O(G) = O(G) ∪ O(H) and of
cardinality equal to the maximum of ℵ0 and the cardinalities of G and H.
Proof. Let n1 be the constant involved in Deﬁnition 2.13, Condition (2’). Let p′ be the smallest
odd prime number such that p′ ≥ n1 , and let p ≥ p′ be a prime number. Let G ∈ ST (p)
and H be a group without 2-torsion. By Proposition 2.14 applied to G∗ = G ∗ H we see that
(G∗ , X) ∈ ST ′ (p) where X is the Bass-Serre tree associated with the free product. Clearly, we
have O(G∗ ) = O(G) ∪ O(H).
    Let G00 = G∗ ∈ ST (p) be the group obtained from (G∗ , X) by applying Proposition 2.15. In
particular, we have O(G∗ ) = O(G00 ). Since G and H are elliptic for their action on the Bass-Serre
tree of the free product, G00 contains isomorphic images of these groups. Furthermore, we will
prove that G00 contains non-commuting translations (see Lemma 5.17).
    Now, ﬁx a pair of distinct involutions (i, j) ∈ G00 of p-aﬃne type. Enumerate all pairs of I(G00 )(2)
as (iλ0 , j0λ ) : λ < γ. We will construct inductively Gα    0 for α < γ. For successor ordinals, suppose
Gα0  has    already    been constructed,  that this group is in class ST (p), that G00 embeds into Gα
                                                                                                    0 , and
that we have O(G) = O(G0 ). Consider the pair (i0 , j0 ). If this pair is of p-aﬃne type, we set
                                   α                         α α

Gα+1
  0     = Gα   0 . If the pair is of p-minimal type, we set
                                    ∗              −1
                               (Gα       α
                                 0 ) = hG0 , t | t    jt = j0α , t−1 it = iα
                                                                           0 i.

Note that this is a well-deﬁned HNN-extension since Di,j and Diα0 ,j0α are isomorphic to Dp . Clearly,
          ∗
in (Gα 0 ) the pair (i0 , j0 ) is of p-aﬃne type.
                       α α
                                             ∗               ′
    By Proposition 2.14, the pair ((Gα    0 ) , X) is in ST (p), with X the Bass-Serre tree of the HNN-
                                     0                   α ∗             ∗
extension. Moreover, clearly G0 embeds into (G0 ) , and O((Gα                     α
                                                                      0 ) ) = O(G0 ).
                                     α+1
    With this in mind, we set G0 = (G0 ) as in Proposition 2.15. This group belongs to the class
                                               α ∗

ST (p), and is such that O(Gα+1    0   ) = O(Gα                     0
                                                 0 ). Furthermore G0 embeds in G0
                                                                                    α+1
                                                                                        (and therefore, so
do G and H) since it has an isomorphic image in the HNN-extension that is elliptic for its action
on the Bass-Serre tree X. Moreover, every pair (iλ0 , j0λ ) of distinct involutions is of p-aﬃne type
for λ ≤ α.
                                                        β
    For a limit ordinal α, we set Gα     0 = ∪β<α G0 . By Remark 2.16 this group is in class ST (p),
G0 embeds into it, and is such that O(G0 ) = O(G00 ). Moreover, every pair (iλ0 , j0λ ) of distinct
  0                                               α

involutions is of p-aﬃne type for λ < α.
    Put G01 = ∪β<γ Gβ0 . With Remark 2.16 in mind, we can deduce similar properties to the ones
in the previous paragraph, and in this case, every pair (r, s) ∈ I(G00 )(2) is of p-aﬃne type. The
cardinality of this group is clearly the maximum of ℵ0 and the cardinalities of G and H.
    Now, build G0k+1 from G0k in a completely analogous way to the construction of G01 from G00 ,
                                   α+1
just replacing Gα   0 by Gk , G0
                             α
                                        by Gα+1
                                             k    , enumerating the pairs of I(G0k ) as (iλk , jkλ ) : λ < γ,
and conjugating pairs of p-minimal type to the pair (i, j) of p-aﬃne type. Once again, assume
                                                      0                    0
that the group Gα    k is in class ST (p), with Gk (and thus also G0 ) embedding into it, and with
                0
O(Gk ) = O(G0 ). If we need to take an HNN-extension at that step, Proposition 2.14 ensures that
      α
                 ∗                                                                        ′
the pair ((Gα k ) , X), with X the Bass-Serre tree of the extension, belongs to ST (p). Moreover,
                                   α+1                              α+1         0
Proposition 2.15 gives that Gk belongs to ST (p) with O(Gk ) = O(G0 ), and with a completely
analogous argument to the case k = 0 we get that G00 embeds into this group. Finally, Remark
2.16 guarantees that G0k+1 is also in class ST (p) and that O(G0k+1 ) = O(G). By construction, G00
embeds into G0k+1 and all pairs (r, s) ∈ I(G0k )(2) are of p-aﬃne type in this group, since they are
conjugate to one such pair (i, j). Again, the cardinality of G0k+1 is the maximum of ℵ0 and the
cardinalities of G and H.
    Set now G = ∪k<ω G0k . Since every group G0k is in class ST (p) and is such that O(G0k ) = O(G00 ),
then by Remark 2.16 G is itself in class ST (p) with O(G) = O(G00 ). Moreover, every pair
(r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) is of p-aﬃne type: if this pair of involutions appears for the ﬁrst time in some
8                           MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


G0m , then our construction ensures that this pair is of p-aﬃne type in G0m+1 . In particular, G is
sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p. By construction, G00 (and thus, G and H) embeds into G,
so it contains non-commuting translations and thus by Theorem 2.11 it is not split. Finally, the
cardinality of this group is the maximum of ℵ0 and the cardinalities of G and H. Thus, G is a
group as claimed by Theorem 2.17.                                                                
    Theorem 2.17 also implies the following result.
Corollary 2.18 (The Existence Theorem). There exists a prime number p′ such that for every
prime number p ≥ p′ there are 2ℵ0 many pairwise non-isomorphic countable non-split sharply
2-transitive groups of characteristic p.
Proof. Keeping the same notation as the statement of Theorem 2.17, put G = AGL(1, Fp ) ∈ ST (p).
We will show how to choose groups H without 2-torsion appropriately so as to obtain 2ℵ0 many
non-isomorphic such groups. Denote by P the set of prime numbers greater than p. There are ℵ0
many such primes, and therefore there are 2ℵ0 many subsets of P . For every S ⊆ P , write HS for
the direct sum of the cyclic groups of order s ∈ S. Notice that the prime numbers in O(HS ) are
precisely the ones in S. Moreover, by the choice of P , none of these primes will be in O(AGL(1, Fp )),
since |AGL(1, Fp )| = p(p − 1), and thus the greatest prime number in O(AGL(1, Fp )) is p.
   Consider now the group HS provided by Theorem 2.17 with H = HS . Such a group is a
countable non-split sharply 2-transitive group of characteristic p with O(HS ) = O(AGL(1, Fp )) ∪
O(HS ). In particular, we have O(HS ) ∩ P = S. Therefore, if S ′ 6= S ′′ are subsets of P , HS ′ ≇ HS ′′
(since O(HS ′ ) 6= O(HS ′′ )). Since there are 2ℵ0 many distinct subsets of P , this yields the desired
conclusion.                                                                                          
   The remainder of this article is devoted to recalling the necessary background and developing
the tools to complete the proof of Theorem 2.17, that is, to proving Propositions 2.14 and 2.15.

                       3. Hyperbolic metric spaces and group actions
   In this section we recall some concepts from metric geometry. We start by introducing length
metric spaces and quasi-geodesics in Subsection 3.1 (for a more comprehensive overview, see for
example [BBI22, Chapter 2]). In Subsection 3.2 we recall some of the basic ideas of hyperbolic
spaces in the sense of Gromov, and in Subsection 3.3 we study the actions by isometries of groups
on these spaces. We follow closely the exposition by Coulon in [Cou16b, Sections 2 and 3].
   From now on, for a metric space X and two points x and x′ of X, we will write dX (x, x′ ) (or
just d(x, x′ ) if the metric space is clear from the context) for the distance between x and x′ , unless
diﬀerent notation is explicitly deﬁned.

3.1. Length metric spaces and quasi-geodesics. For a topological space X, a path in X is a
continuous map γ : I −→ X, where I is an interval (possibly consisting of a single point) in R.
Definition 3.1. Let (X, d) be a metric space and let γ : [a, b] −→ X be a path. A partition of
[a, b] is a ﬁnite collection Y = {y0 , . . . yN } ⊂ [a, b] such that a = y0 ≤ y1 ≤ · · · ≤ yN = b. The sum
of a partition Y is deﬁned as
                                                  XN
                                      Σ(Y ) =         d(γ(yi−1 ), γ(yi )).
                                              i=1
The length of the path γ with respect to the metric d is denoted by Ld (γ) and deﬁned as
                            Ld (γ) = sup{Σ(Y ) : Y is a partition of [a, b]}.
Definition 3.2. Let (X, d) be a metric space connected by rectiﬁable paths (i.e. between any two
points there is a path of ﬁnite length). Then the intrinsic metric dℓ on X is deﬁned by putting
                     dℓ (x, y) = inf{Ld (γ) : γ : [a, b] −→ X, γ(a) = x, γ(b) = y}.
          NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                          9


A metric space (X, d) is said to be a length metric space (or just a length space) if dℓ = d. If
moreover (X, d) has the property that there always exists a path γ that achieves the inﬁmum in
the deﬁnition of dℓ , then (X, d) is called a geodesic metric space, and the path γ is called a geodesic.
  We now recall the concepts of a quasi-isometric embedding and of a quasi-geodesic.
Definition 3.3. Let ℓ, L ≥ 0 and k ≥ 1, and let X1 and X2 be two metric spaces. A map
f : X1 −→ X2 is a (k, ℓ)-quasi-isometric embedding if for every two points x, y ∈ X1 we have:
                      1
                        dX (f (x), f (y)) − ℓ ≤ dX1 (x, y) ≤ kdX2 (f (x), f (y)) + ℓ.
                      k 2
We say that f is an L-local (k, ℓ)-quasi-isometric embedding if its restriction to any subset of
diameter at most L is a (k, ℓ)-quasi-isometric embedding.
Definition 3.4. Let X be a metric space, I ⊆ R an interval. A path γ : I −→ X that is a (k, ℓ)-
quasi-isometric embedding is called a (k, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic. If it is an L-local (k, ℓ)-quasi-isometric
embedding it is called an L-local (k, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic.
Remark 3.5. Note that for k = 1 and ℓ = 0, f is a genuine isometry in Deﬁnition 3.3, and γ is a
genuine geodesic in Deﬁnition 3.4.
Remark 3.6. If (X, d) is a length space, then by deﬁnition of the inﬁmum, for every pair of points
x, y ∈ X and every ℓ > 0, there exists a path γ : [a, b] → X such that d(x, y) ≤ Ld (γ) ≤ d(x, y) + ℓ.
After reparametrizing γ (by arc length) if necessary, we can assume that a = 0 and b = Ld (γ) and
thus that Ld (γ) = |b − a|. Hence, γ is a (1, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic (and thus it is a (k, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic
for every k ≥ 1).
3.2. Hyperbolic metric spaces. For a metric space X, a point x in X and a subset Y of X, we
will write
                                      dX (x, Y ) = inf {dX (x, y)}
                                                    y∈Y

for the distance between x and Y . Also, for a subset Y of X we will write diam(Y ) for the diameter
of Y , that is,
                                     diam(Y ) = sup (dX (y, y ′ )).
                                                  y,y ′ ∈Y

We will put BX (x, r) (or simply B(x, r) if the metric space X is clear by context) for the ball of
radius r centered at x.
Definition 3.7. Let x, y and z be three points of X. The Gromov product of x and y with respect
to z is
                                      1
                            hx, yiz = {d(x, z) + d(y, z) − d(x, y)}.
                                      2
A metric space X is said to be δ-hyperbolic (in the sense of Gromov) if for every four points
x, y, z, t ∈ X we have
                                   hx, zit ≥ min{hx, yit , hy, zit } − δ.
We will say that X is hyperbolic if it is δ-hyperbolic for some δ ≥ 0.
Remark 3.8. For simplicity of notation, from now on we assume that the hyperbolicity constant δ
is positive. However, notice that this is not a serious restrain: if X is δ-hyperbolic for δ ≥ 0, then
it is δ ′ -hyperbolic for every δ ′ ≥ δ.
    If X is a δ-hyperbolic geodesic metric space, then every geodesic triangle in X is 2δ-thin,
that is, for every geodesic triangle in X, every side of the triangle is contained in the closed
2δ-neighbourhood of the union of the other two sides [DK18, Lemma 11.28].
10                           MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


3.2.1. Quasi-geodesic polygons. We now collect some useful properties of quasi-geodesic polygons
in length spaces, similar to the δ-thin condition for triangles in geodesic spaces. We follow closely
the exposition by Druţu and Kapovich in [DK18, Chapter 11].
Definition 3.9. Let X be a metric space, x, y, z ∈ X. A (k, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic triangle with vertices
x, y and z is the union of the image of three paths γx,y , γy,z and γz,x such that the initial point
of γt,t′ is t, the endpoint is t′ and each path is a (k, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic.
   From now on, we will not distinguish between paths (that are actually maps from an interval of
the real line to X) from their images in X, and we will assume these paths are parametrized by
arc length. Notice that if X is a length space, we get immediately from Remark 3.6 that for any
x, y, z ∈ X and any ℓ > 0, there exists a (1, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic triangle with vertices x, y and z. We
will denote one such triangle by [x, y, z]ℓ and its sides by [x, y]ℓ , [y, z]ℓ and [x, z]ℓ respectively.
   In a similar way, we can deﬁne a (k, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic n-gon for n ≥ 4. As in geodesic spaces,
one such n-gon is said to be α-thin if every side is contained in the closed α-neighbourhood of the
other n − 1 sides.
   Lemma 3.10 below shows how, even though quasi-geodesics between two points may not be
unique in a hyperbolic length space, they cannot go too far away from one another. This result is
well-known in the context of geodesic spaces. Since we couldn’t ﬁnd a proof in the literature for
length spaces, we include a proof of this result in Appendix A.
Lemma 3.10. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic metric space, let x, y ∈ X. Let γ be a (1, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic
connecting x to y for ℓ ≥ 0. Let p ∈ X be a point such that
                                  d(x, p) + d(p, y) ≤ d(x, y) + 2δ + 3ℓ.
Then, d(p, γ) ≤ 4δ + 8ℓ.
Lemma 3.11. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic metric space and let [x, y, p]ℓ be a (1, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic
triangle. Then, this triangle is (4δ + 8ℓ)-thin.
Proof. Let z ∈ [x, y]ℓ , we need to prove that it is (4δ+8ℓ)-close to [y, p]ℓ ∪[x, p]ℓ . By δ-hyperbolicity,
we have
                                  hx, yip ≥ min({hx, zip , hy, zip }) − δ.
Without loss of generality, we may consider that
                                          hx, yip ≥ hx, zip − δ,
i.e. that
                              d(y, p) − d(x, y) ≥ d(z, p) − d(x, z) − 2δ.
We will show that z is (4δ + 8l)-close to [y, p]ℓ . By combining the last inequality with the fact that,
since z ∈ [x, y]ℓ we have
                                   d(x, y) − d(x, z) ≥ d(y, z) − 3ℓ,
we obtain
                                 d(y, z) + d(z, p) ≤ d(y, p) + 3ℓ + 2δ.
By Lemma 3.10, we obtain that d(z, [y, p]ℓ ) ≤ 4δ + 8ℓ.                                               
   Notice that the bound shown may not be the optimal one. We immediately obtain the following
corollary.
Corollary 3.12. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space. Then every (1, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic n-gon is
(4(n − 2)δ + 8(n − 2)ℓ)-thin.
   Corollary 3.12 and the following lemma are proved in a completely analogous way to the case of
geodesic n-gons in geodesic spaces (see for example [DK18, Section 11.1]), that is, by triangulating
the n-gon by n−3 (1, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic diagonals joining a given vertex to the non-adjacent vertices
of the n-gon.
          NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                       11


Lemma 3.13. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space, [p, q, r, s]ℓ a (1, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic quadrangle
with d(p, q) = d(r, s). Then, for any pair of points x ∈ [p, q]ℓ and y ∈ [r, s]ℓ with d(p, x) = d(s, y)
we have that
                          d(x, y) ≤ 5 max({d(s, p) , d(q, r)}) + 16δ + 38ℓ.
3.2.2. Quasi-convex and strongly quasi-convex subsets. We now deﬁne the concepts of a quasi-
convex subset of a metric space and of a strongly quasi-convex subset of a hyperbolic length space.
For a more comprehensive overview, see [Cou16b, Subsection 2.3].
   For a subset Y of a metric space X, we write Y α (respectively, Y +α ) for the open (respectively,
closed) α-neighbourhood of Y .
Definition 3.14. Let X be a metric space, α ≥ 0. A subset Y of X is α-quasi-convex if for every
pair of points y, y ′ ∈ Y and every point x ∈ X we have that
                                       d(x, Y ) ≤ hy, y ′ ix + α.
Remark 3.15. If X is a geodesic space, the usual deﬁnition of an α-quasi-convex subset Y is that
every geodesic joining two points of Y is contained in Y +α . If X is a δ-hyperbolic geodesic space,
a subset is α-quasi-convex in the usual sense if and only if it is (α + 4δ)-quasi-convex in the sense
of Deﬁnition 3.14.
Definition 3.16. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space, α ≥ 0. Let Y be a subset of X connected
by rectiﬁable paths. Denote by dY the length metric on Y induced by the restriction of the length
structure on X to Y (see [BBI22, Section 2] for the precise deﬁnition of a length structure). The
subset Y is said to be strongly quasi-convex if it is 2δ-quasi-convex and for every pair of points
y, y ′ ∈ Y we have that
                                   dY (y, y ′ ) ≤ dX (y, y ′ ) + 8δ.
Definition 3.17. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space, Y a subset of X. The hull of Y , denoted
by hull(Y ), is the union of all (1, δ)-quasi-geodesics joining two points of Y .
Lemma 3.18. [Cou14, Lemma 2.15] Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space, Y a subset of X. The
hull of Y is 6δ-quasi-convex.
3.2.3. The boundary at infinity. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic metric space, and x ∈ X. A sequence
(yn )n∈N is said to converge to infinity if hym , ym′ ix tends to inﬁnity as m and m′ tend to inﬁnity.
Note that by hyperbolicity this does not depend on the choice of x. The set S of sequences
converging to inﬁnity is endowed with a relation R ⊆ S 2 deﬁned as follows: two sequences (yn )n∈N
and (zn )n∈N in S are related if
                                          lim hyn , zn ix = +∞.
                                        n→∞
Again hyperbolicity gives that this is in fact an equivalence relation.
Definition 3.19. Let X be a hyperbolic metric space, S the set of sequences of points of X
converging to inﬁnity. The boundary at infinity of X, denoted as ∂X, is the quotient of S by the
equivalence relation R.
   This deﬁnition does not depend on the choice of the base point x since X is hyperbolic. We will
write [(xm )m∈N ] for the equivalence class of the sequence (xm )m∈N . For a subset Y of X, we will
write ∂Y for the set of elements of ∂X that are limits of sequences of points of Y .
   By construction, if a group G acts by isometries on a hyperbolic space X this action extends in
a natural way to an action on the boundary ∂X: for η = [(xm )m∈N ] ∈ ∂X, put g ·η = [(g ·xm )m∈N ].
3.3. Group actions on hyperbolic spaces. For a group G acting by isometries on a hyperbolic
metric space X, we denote by ∂G the set of accumulation points of G · x in ∂X (note again that
this deﬁnition does not depend on the choice of x). Then either one (and hence every) orbit of G
is bounded or ∂G is non-empty (see for example [Cou16b, Proposition 3.4]).
   Recall that if g is an isometry of X, then g is of one of the following types:
12                          MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


        • elliptic, i.e. ∂hgi is empty,
        • parabolic, i.e. ∂hgi has exactly one element, and
        • loxodromic, i.e. ∂hgi has exactly two elements.
     For a loxodromic isometry g, the two elements of ∂hgi are
                          g −∞ = [(g −m · x)m∈N ] and g +∞ = [(g m · x)m∈N ].
They are the only points of ∂X ﬁxed by g (see [CDP06, Chapitre 10, Proposition 6.6]). Conversely
we have the following well-known lemma.
Lemma 3.20. [Cou16b, Proposition 3.6] Let G be a group acting by isometries on a hyperbolic
metric space X. If ∂G has at least two points, then G contains a loxodromic isometry.
   Next we introduce two concepts of translation lengths that can be used, among other things, to
give a characterization of loxodromic isometries.
Definition 3.21. Let X be a hyperbolic metric space, g an isometry of X. The translation length
of g, denoted by [g]X (or simply [g] if the metric space X is clear from the context) is
                                   [g]X = inf{d(x, g · x) : x ∈ X}.
The asymptotic translation length of g, denoted by [g]∞                ∞
                                                       X (or simply [g] ) is
                                                  1
                                   [g]∞
                                      X = n→+∞
                                            lim     d(x, g n · x).
                                                  n
   Once again, notice that the deﬁnition of the asymptotic translation length does not depend on
the choice of x. These two concepts are related as follows:
Lemma 3.22. [CDP06, Chapitre 10, Propositions 6.3 and 6.4] Let X be a δ-hyperbolic metric
space, g an isometry of X. Then, the quantities [g] and [g]∞ satisfy
                                      [g]∞ ≤ [g] ≤ [g]∞ + 32δ,
and g is loxodromic if and only if [g]∞ > 0.
3.3.1. The axis of an isometry. We now introduce the concepts of the axis of an isometry and
the cylinder of a loxodromic isometry, which will play an important role in the small cancellation
results introduced in Section 4. For a hyperbolic length space X and two distinct points ζ and η
of ∂X, we say that a path γ : R −→ X joins ζ and η if
                               {[(γ(−m))m∈N ], [(γ(m))m∈N ]} = {ζ, η}.
Definition 3.23. Let X be a hyperbolic metric space, g be an isometry of X. The axis of g,
denoted as Ag is the set
                             {x ∈ X : d(x, g · x) < [g] + 8δ}.
   Note that the axis is deﬁned for any isometry of G, not necessarily a loxodromic one.
   In the following, let LS ∈ N be such that every LS δ-local (1, 105 δ)-quasi-geodesic is a (global)
(2, 105 δ)-quasi-geodesic, and there is a bound for the Hausdorﬀ distance between any two such
quasi-geodesics.
   Such a number LS exists and does not depend on δ by [Cou16b, Proposition 2.6 and Corollary
2.7].
Definition 3.24. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space, g a loxodromic isometry of X. We denote
by Γg the union of all LS δ-local (1, δ)-quasi-geodesics joining g −∞ and g +∞ . The cylinder of g,
denoted as Yg is the open 20δ-neighbourhood of Γg .
   The next result relates the axis and the cylinder of a loxodromic isometry (see [Cou14, Lemmas
2.32 and 2.33] and [Cou16b, Lemma 3.13]).
Lemma 3.25. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space, g a loxodromic isometry of X, Ag the axis of
g and Yg the cylinder of g. Then Ag ⊆ Yg , Yg ⊆ A+52δ
                                                 g    and Yg is a strongly quasi-convex subset of
X.
          NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                      13


3.3.2. Elementary subgroups. Let X be a hyperbolic metric space, and let G be a group acting on
X by isometries. Let H be a subgroup of G. We say that H is elementary if ∂H has at most two
points. Otherwise, we say it is non-elementary. We say that an elementary subgroup H is
      • elliptic if its orbits are bounded (equivalently, if ∂H is empty),
      • parabolic if ∂H has exactly one point, or
      • loxodromic if ∂H has exactly two points.
   Notice that any ﬁnite subgroup of G is elliptic. We can associate to an elliptic subgroup a set
of ‘almost ﬁxed points’ in the sense of the following deﬁnition.
Definition 3.26. Let F be an elliptic subgroup of G. The characteristic set of F is
                             CF = {x ∈ X : ∀g ∈ F, d(g · x, x) ≤ 11δ}.
Lemma 3.27. [Cou16b, Corollary 3.27] Let F be an elliptic subgroup of G. The characteristic set
CF is 9δ-quasi-convex.
3.3.3. Acylindrical group actions. Recall that a group is hyperbolic if and only if it acts properly
and cocompactly by isometries on a hyperbolic metric space. In recent years, many interesting
results were obtained for groups that admit a (non-elementary) action on a hyperbolic metric
space by isometries satisfying a weaker condition. One of the two weaker conditions that will be
considered in this paper is acylindricity. This notion goes back to Sela’s paper [Sel97], where it
was considered for groups acting on trees. In the context of general metric spaces, the following
deﬁnition was introduced by Bowditch in [Bow08].
Definition 3.28. Let G be a group acting by isometries on a δ-hyperbolic metric space X. The
action is said to be acylindrical if for every ε ≥ 0 there exist M, L > 0 such that for every x, y ∈ X
with d(x, y) ≥ L we have:
                           |{g ∈ G : d(x, g · x) ≤ ε, d(y, g · y) ≤ ε}| ≤ M.
Remark 3.29. By [DGO17, Proposition 5.31] it suﬃces to check this condition for ε = 100δ. Even
though this result is stated for geodesic spaces, this also holds for length spaces (see [Cou21,
Proposition 5.6]).
  The following lemma, which is an immediate consequence of [Osi16, Theorem 1.1], will play an
important role in the proof of our main result.
Lemma 3.30. Le G be a group acting acylindrically by isometries on a hyperbolic metric space.
Then G has no parabolic subgroup.
3.3.4. Weakly properly discontinuous group actions. We now deﬁne a weakening of acylindricity,
namely weak proper discontinuity. This notion was introduced by Bestvina and Fujiwara in [BF02].
Definition 3.31. Let G be a group acting by isometries on a metric space X, and let h ∈ G be
a loxodromic element. The isometry h is said to satisfy the weak proper discontinuity property
(WPD property) if for every x ∈ X and every ε ≥ 0 there exist n ∈ N, M > 0 such that
                       |{g ∈ G : d(x, g · x) ≤ ε, d(hn · x, ghn · x) ≤ ε}| ≤ M.
The action is said to be weakly properly discontinuous (WPD) if every loxodromic element satisﬁes
the WPD property.
Remark 3.32. Clearly, an acylindrical action is also WPD.
  The following lemma will be crucial (see [Cou16b, Section 3]).
Lemma 3.33. Let G be a group with a WPD action by isometries on a hyperbolic length space
X. Then every loxodromic subgroup H of G is contained in a unique maximal loxodromic subgroup
of G, namely the setwise stabilizer of the pair ∂H ⊂ ∂G, denoted by MG (H). Moreover, MG (H)
(and thus H) are virtually cyclic.
14                         MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


   Recall that an inﬁnite virtually cyclic group H maps either onto Z or onto D∞ , with ﬁnite
kernel (which is the unique maximal normal ﬁnite subgroup of H). In the ﬁrst case, we say that
H is of cyclic type, and in the second case we say that H is of dihedral type. An element of H
is called primitive if it maps to an element of Z (in the ﬁrst case) or of D∞ (in the second case)
that has inﬁnite order and does not admit a proper root. This terminology can be extended to
a loxodromic element h of G: the element h is called primitive if it is primitive as an element of
the virtually cyclic subgroup MG (hhi) (equivalently, h has minimal asymptotic translation length
among the loxodromic elements of MG (hhi)).
   The next lemma relates the cylinder of a loxodromic isometry with the characteristic subset of
ﬁnite subgroups normalized by this element.
Lemma 3.34. [Cou16b, Lemma 3.33] Let G be a group with a WPD action by isometries on a
hyperbolic length space X. Let g be a loxodromic element of G and H a subgroup fixing the set
{g ±∞ } pointwise. Let F be the maximal normal finite subgroup of H. Then, the cylinder Yg is
contained in the 51δ-neighbourhood of the characteristic subset CF .

                              4. Geometric small cancellation
   In the 1910s, Dehn proved that for the fundamental group of a closed orientable surface of
genus at least two the word problem is solvable. His work involved negative curvature, and was a
precursor for small cancellation theory. Small cancellation conditions were formulated explicitely
for the ﬁrst time by Tartakovskii in 1949. Then, small cancellation theory was developed notably
by Greendlinger in the early 1960s and by Lyndon and Schupp around the same time to study
groups given by group presentations where deﬁning relations have small overlaps with each other.
However, the geometric origins of small cancellation theory have gradually been forgotten in favour
of combinatorial and topological methods. According to Gromov, “the role of curvature was reduced
to a metaphor (algebraists do not trust geometry)”, and he proposed to return to the geometric
sources of small cancellation theory. This point of view appears in [Gro01] and [DG08], and was
further developed extensively in the work of Coulon.
   In this section we introduce and adapt the small cancellation results proved in [Cou16b]. We
start by deﬁning in Subsection 4.1 some invariants of a WPD group action on a hyperbolic metric
space (for a more comprehensive overview, see [Cou16b, Section 3.5]). Then, in Subsection 4.2 we
introduce the cone-off construction (see also [Cou16b, Section 4]), that will play a central role when
we state Theorem 4.15 in Subsection 4.3 and Proposition 4.25 and Theorem 4.28 in Subsection 4.4,
which are the small cancellation results used to prove Proposition 2.15.
4.1. Invariants of a Group Action. Throughout this subsection we ﬁx a group G with a WPD
action by isometries on a hyperbolic space X. We introduce the invariants rinj (Q, X) (for a subset Q
of G), e(G, X), ν(G, X) and A(G, X). They will play the role of the small cancellation parameters
in Subsection 4.3.
Definition 4.1. Let Q be a subset of G. The injectivity radius of Q is
                                               ∞
                           rinj (Q, X) = inf{[g]   : g ∈ Q, g loxodromic}.
Definition 4.2. The invariant e(G, X) is the least common multiple of |F ⋊ Aut(F )| where F
runs over the maximal normal ﬁnite subgroup of all maximal loxodromic subgroups of G.
Remark 4.3. Notice that if all loxodromic subgroups of G are cyclic, then we will get e(G, X) = 1.
Definition 4.4. The invariant ν(G, X) (or simply ν) is the smallest positive integer m satisfying
the following property: let g and h be two isometries of G with h loxodromic. If g, h−1 gh,...,
h−m ghm generate an elementary subgroup which is not loxodromic, then g and h generate an
elementary subgroup of G.
   The proof of Lemma 6.12 in [Cou16b] yields the following bound for ν(G, X) for acylindrical
actions with positive injectivity radius.
           NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                            15


Lemma 4.5. Assume the action of G on X is acylindrical and with positive injectivity radius. Call
L and M the parameters in the definition of an acylindrical action (Definition 3.28) corresponding
to ε = 97δ, and put M ′ as the smallest positive integer such that M ′ rinj (G, X) ≥ L. Then,
ν(G, X) ≤ M ′ + M .
Definition 4.6. Assume the action of G on X has ﬁnite parameter ν = ν(G, X).
  For g1 , . . . , gm ∈ G we put
                                                                               
                              A(g1 , . . . , gm ) = diam A+13δ
                                                          g1   ∩ . . . ∩ A+13δ
                                                                          gm     .
We denote by A the set of (ν +1)-tuples (g0 , . . . , gν ) such that g0 , . . . , gν generate a non-elementary
subgroup of G and for all j ∈ {0, . . . , ν} we have [gj ] ≤ LS δ. We deﬁne
                                A(G, X) =         sup      ({A (g0 , . . . , gν )}).
                                             (g0 ,...,gν )∈A

Remark 4.7. Notice that if G acts on a δ-hyperbolic metric space X and λX is a rescaling of X
(that is, a metric space with the same underlying set and distances multiplied by λ), then λX is a
λδ-hyperbolic metric space endowed with an action of G and invariants rinj (Q, λX) = λrinj (Q, X)
for any subset Q of G, e(G, λX) = e(G, X), ν(G, λX) = ν(G, X) and A(G, λX) = λA(G, X).
4.2. The Cone-Off Construction. In this subsection we introduce the cone-off construction
over certain families of subspaces of a metric space, and explain how to extend the action of
a group on the metric space to an action on the cone-oﬀ. This construction will allow us to
iteratively apply the Small Cancellation Theorem introduced in Subsection 4.3. For the rest of this
section, we ﬁx a number ρ > 0.
Definition 4.8. Let X be a metric space. The cone over X of radius ρ, denoted by Zρ (X) (or,
if the value of ρ is clear by context, simply Z(X)) is the topological quotient of X × [0, ρ] by the
equivalence relation identifying all points of the form (x, 0), x ∈ X.
   The equivalence class of (x, 0) is called the apex of the cone. The cone over X is endowed with
a metric characterized as follows (see [BH13, Chapter I.5, Proposition 5.9]). Let x = (y, r) and
x′ = (y ′ , r′ ) be two points of Z(X), then
                                                                                          
                            ′                  ′                  ′            dX (y, y ′ )
           cosh(dZ(X) (x, x )) = cosh(r) cosh(r ) − sinh(r) sinh(r )cos min π,                 .
                                                                                sinh(ρ)
   In addition, if X is a length space, then so is Z(X). An action by isometries of a group G over
X naturally extends to an action by isometries on Z(X) as follows: for x = (y, r) in Z(X) and
g ∈ G, put g · x = (g · y, r). Note that in this case the apex of Z(X) is a global ﬁxed point.
   We can compare the original metric space X with its cone Z(X) by deﬁning a comparison map
ψ : X −→ Z(X) such that x 7−→ (x, ρ).
   Now we are ready to introduce the cone-oﬀ construction.
Definition 4.9. Let X be a hyperbolic length space, Y a collection of strongly quasi-convex subsets
of X. For Y ∈ Y, denote by dY the metric on Y given by the length structure on Y induced by
the length structure of X, by Z(Y ) the cone over Y (endowed with the distance dY ) of radius ρ
and by ψY the corresponding comparison map.
   The cone-off of radius ρ over X relative to Y, denoted by Ẋρ (Y) (or simply Ẋ if ρ and Y are
clear by context) is the quotient of the disjoint union of X and the Z(Y ) for all Y ∈ Y by the
equivalence relation that, for all Y ∈ Y and y ∈ Y , identiﬁes y with ψY (y) ∈ Z(Y ).
   Since the hyperbolic length space X embeds into the cone-oﬀ Ẋ, we will identify it with its
image under this embedding. The cone-oﬀ is naturally endowed with a metric given by the length
structure on Ẋ induced by the length structures on X and Z(Y ) for all Y ∈ Y [Cou16b, Section
4.2].
16                          MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


  The following lemma gives conditions under which the cone-oﬀ is hyperbolic, with certain control
over the hyperbolicity constant. For this purpose, we introduce a parameter that controls the
overlap between the elements of Y. We write
                                                                 
                            ∆(Y) = sup       diam Y1+5δ ∩ Y2+5δ .
                                        Y1 6=Y2 ∈Y

     Following Coulon, we denote by δ the hyperbolicity constant of the hyperbolic plane.
Lemma 4.10. [Cou14, Proposition 6.4] There exist positive numbers δ0 , ∆0 and ρ0 that satisfy
the following property. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic space with δ ≤ δ0 . Let Y be a family of strongly
quasi-convex subsets of X with ∆(Y) ≤ ∆0 . Let ρ ≥ ρ0 . Then the cone-off Ẋρ (Y) is δ̇-hyperbolic,
with δ̇ = 900δ.
   For the remainder of this subsection, we ﬁx a length space X and a family Y as in Deﬁnition 4.9.
   Lemmas 4.12 and 4.13 provide some insight on how the metric on Ẋ relates to the metric
on X and to the cones Z(Y ). In order to state the ﬁrst of these results, we introduce the map
µ : R≥0 −→ R≥0 characterized by
                                                                         
                                       2           2                   t
                    cosh(µ(t)) = cosh (ρ) − sinh (ρ)cos min π,
                                                                   sinh(ρ)
for all t ≥ 0. The map µ has the following properties that will be used further down.
Lemma 4.11. [Cou16b, Proposition 4.2] The map µ is continuous, concave (down) and non-
decreasing. Furthermore, the following hold.
                                                        
                                       1            1
      • For all t ≥ 0, we have: t −        1+               t3 ≤ µ(t) ≤ t, and
                                       24       sinh2 (ρ)      
                                                           µ(t)
      • for all t ∈ [0, π sinh(ρ)], we have: t ≤ π sinh          .
                                                             2
Lemma 4.12. [Cou14, Lemma 5.8] For every x, x′ ∈ X we have:
                                µ(dX (x, x′ )) ≤ dẊ (x, x′ ) ≤ dX (x, x′ ).
Lemma 4.13. [Cou14, Lemma 5.7] Let v be the apex of a cone Z(Y ) for some Y ∈ Y. Then,
BẊ (v, ρ) = Z(Y )\Y .
4.2.1. Group action on the cone-off. For the remainder of Section 4, we ﬁx real numbers ρ ≥
max({ρ0 , 1010 δ, 1020 LS δ}), δ ≤ δ0 , a δ-hyperbolic length space X, a family Y of strongly quasi-
convex subsets of X with ∆(Y) ≤ ∆0 , where ρ0 , δ0 and ∆0 are the parameters provided by
Lemma 4.10.
   Consider a group G acting by isometries on X, and acting on the family Y by left translation,
that is, such that g · Y ∈ Y for all Y ∈ Y. We can extend this action by homogeneity to an action
of G on the cone-oﬀ, as follows. Let Y ∈ Y and x = (y, r) be a point of the cone Z(Y ). For g ∈ G
we deﬁne g · x = g · (y, r) = (g · y, r) ∈ Z(g · Y ). It follows from the deﬁnition of the metric of Ẋ
that this action is an isometry on Ẋ.
   The next result uses techniques from [Cou16b, Proposition 4.10] for WPD actions on hyperbolic
length spaces, and from [DGO17, Proposition 5.40] for acylindrical actions on hyperbolic geodesic
spaces.
Lemma 4.14. If the action of G on X is acylindrical, then so is the induced action on Ẋ.
Proof. We will apply Remark 3.29. The action on X is acylindrical, therefore, there are positive
numbers L′ and M ′ such that, for all x, x′ ∈ X, if dX (x, x′ ) is at least L′ , then there are at most
M ′ elements moving x and x′ less than π sinh(300δ̇). We will show that we can take M ′ and L′ +4ρ
as the parameters M and L of Remark 3.29.
    Now, let a, b ∈ Ẋ be such that d(a, b) ≥ L′ + 4ρ, and consider a (1, δ̇)-quasi-geodesic segment
[a, b]δ̇ . If an element g ∈ G moves both a and b by less than 100δ̇, we can apply Lemma 3.13 to
            NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                      17


conclude that any point in this quasi-geodesic segment is moved by less than 600δ̇ by g. Further-
more, since the diameter of the ball around an apex of the cone is 2ρ, this quasi-geodesic must
contain points of X at distance at least L′ . Therefore, we may assume that a, b ∈ X and that we
need to bound the number of elements of G moving a and b by at most 600δ̇. By Lemma 4.12, we
have that
                              µ(dX (a, g · a)) ≤ dẊ (a, g · a) ≤ 600δ̇.
By the choice of ρ, we have that µ(dX (a, g · a)) < π sinh(ρ), and therefore Lemma 4.11 gives
                                       dX (a, g · a) ≤ π sinh(300δ̇).
Similarly, we obtain that
                                       dX (b, g · b) ≤ π sinh(300δ̇),
so the number of elements g satisfying this property is indeed at most M ′ .                          
4.3. The Small Cancellation Theorem. In this subsection we will use the cone-oﬀ construction
introduced in Subsection 4.2 to state a small cancellation theorem. We follow the exposition by
Coulon in [Cou16b, Section 5] with the diﬀerence that we consider the more restricted case of
acylindrical actions (instead of WPD ones). To simplify the statements of some results, throughout
this subsection we will ﬁx a group G acting on a δ-hyperbolic length space X. We assume that
this action is acylindrical and non-elementary. We consider a family Q of pairs (H, Y ) such that
      • there exists an odd integer n ≥ 100 such that for all H we have a loxodromic element
         h′ ∈ G such that H = hh′n i,
      • Y is the cylinder Yh for h = h′n ,
      • there is a normal subgroup N E G without involutions and containing the normal subgroup
         K of G generated by the collection {H : (H, Y ) ∈ Q} such that for every pair (H, Y ) ∈ Q
         the element h′ is a primitive loxodromic element of N , and
      • there is an action of G on Q via g · (H, Y ) = (g −1 Hg, g −1 Y ) for g ∈ G and (H, Y ) ∈ Q.
   We want to study the quotient G     b = G/K, and to that purpose, we will deﬁne a metric space
 b             b
X on which G acts. Notice ﬁrst that, since Y is a strongly quasi-convex subset of X for all
(H, Y ) ∈ Q (see Lemma 3.25), we can construct the cone-oﬀ Ẋ of radius ρ relative to the family
{Y : (H, Y ) ∈ Q}. The group G has a natural action on this space induced by the action of G on
X. We deﬁne the space X    b as the quotient of Ẋ by K. This space is endowed with an action of G   b
(see [Cou16b, Section 5.1]). We write ζ : Ẋ −→ X  b for the projection map and v(Q) for the subset
of Ẋ consisting of the apices of the cones Z(Y ) for (H, Y ) ∈ Q. Then vb(Q) denotes its image in
 b We will also call the elements of vb(Q) apices. For an element g ∈ G (respectively, x ∈ Ẋ), we
X.
will write b
           g (respectively, x                   b (respectively, X).
                            b) for its image in G                b
   In order to get some desired properties of the action of G   b on X,b we need the action of G on
X to satisfy some conditions related to the quantities ∆(Q) and T (Q), that play the role of the
length of the largest piece and the length of the shortest relator in the usual small cancellation
theory, and that are deﬁned as
                    ∆(Q) = sup({diam(Y1+5δ ∩ Y2+5δ ) : (H1 , Y1 ) 6= (H2 , Y2 ) ∈ Q})
and
                               T (Q) = inf({[h] : h ∈ H , (H, Y ) ∈ Q}).
  Now we can introduce the aforementioned small cancellation result. Recall that δ denotes the
hyperbolicity constant of the hyperbolic plane.
Lemma 4.15. There exist positive constants ρ0 , δ0 and ∆0 that are independent of X, G and Q
such that for δ ≤ δ0 , ρ ≥ ρ0 , ∆(Q) ≤ ∆0 and T (Q) ≥ 8π sinh(ρ) the following hold.
      (1) (see [Cou14, Proposition 6.4]) The cone-off Ẋ is a δ̇-hyperbolic length space with δ̇ = 900δ.
                                                           b
                                                   b is a δ-hyperbolic
      (2) (see [Cou14, Proposition 6.7]) The space X                    length space with δb = 64·104δ.
18                          MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


     (3) (see [Cou14, Propositions 5.14 and 5.15]) The group G    b = G/K acts by isometries on X, b
         and this action is WPD and non-elementary.
     (4) For every (H, Y ) ∈ Q, the projection G ։ G    b induces an isomorphism from Stab(Y )/H
         onto the image of Stab(Y ).
     (5) (see [Cou16b, Proposition 5.16]) The image in G     b of an elliptic (respectively parabolic,
         loxodromic) subgroup of G is elliptic (respectively parabolic or elliptic, elementary).
     (6) (see [Cou16b, Proposition 5.17]) Let E be an elliptic subgroup of G. The projection G ։ G  b
         induces an isomorphism from E onto its image.
     (7) (see [Cou16b, Proposition 5.18]) Let E   b be an elliptic subgroup of G. b Then one of the
         following holds.
          (a) There is an elliptic subgroup E of G (for its action on X) such that the projection
              G։G   b induces an isomorphism from E onto E.   b
          (b) There exists b                    b
                           v ∈ vb(Q) such that E is contained in Stab(b v ).
Remark 4.16. Notice that (H1 , Y1 ) 6= (H2 , Y2 ) ∈ Q implies Y1 6= Y2 since ∆(Q) is ﬁnite and the
cylinder of a loxodromic element is unbounded. In particular, for (H, Y ) ∈ Q we must have indeed
that H is a normal subgroup of Stab(Y ), so that point (4) of Lemma 4.15 actually makes sense.
Moreover, this also implies that, for all vb ∈ vb(Q), if we write Y for the subset of a pair (H, Y ) ∈ Q
such that vb is the image of the vertex corresponding to Z(Y ), then Stab(b     v) ∼
                                                                                   = Stab(Y )/H. Note
that Stab(bv ) is ﬁnite since Stab(Y ) is virtually cyclic inﬁnite (by Lemma 3.33) and H is inﬁnite, and
thus has ﬁnite index in Stab(Y ). Moreover, if F is the maximal ﬁnite normal subgroup of Stab(Y ),
then its isomorphic image Fb in Stab(b      v ) is normal in this subgroup. Furthermore, Stab(b  v )/Fb is
isomorphic either to Dn or to Cn , and the quotient map takes the elliptic elements of Stab(Y ) into
either the trivial element or an involution of Dn .
                                                    b and of the action of the group G
   We now state a number of properties of the space X                                b on it that
will prove to be useful further forward.
Lemma 4.17. [Cou16b, Proposition 5.8] The set vb(Q) has at least two elements.
Lemma 4.18. [Cou16b, Corollary 5.10] Let (H, Y ) ∈ Q and v be the apex of Z(Y ). Let gb ∈ Stab(b  v)
be such that it is not the image of an elliptic element of Stab(Y ). Then, there exists k ∈ Z such
                               b
that Abgk is contained in the 6δ-neighbourhood   of b
                                                    v . In particular, b
                                                                       v is the unique apex of vb(Q)
fixed by gb.
Lemma 4.19. [Cou14, Proposition 3.21] Let α ≥ 0 and d ≥ α. Let Zb be an α-quasi-convex subset
   b We assume that, for every vb ∈ b
of X.                                           b does not intersect B(b
                                         v (Q), Z                                       b Then, there
                                                                       v , ρ/20 + d + 10δ).
exists a subset Z of Ẋ with the following properties.
    (1) The map ζ : Ẋ −→ X    b induces an isometry from Z onto Z.  b
    (2) For every b      b         b                                 b
                    g ∈ G, if gb · Z lies in the d-neighbourhood of Z, then there exists a preimage g
            g such that for every z, z ′ ∈ Z, we have that
         of b
                                      dẊ (g · z ′ , z) = dXb (b
                                                               g · zb′ , zb).
                            b induces an isomorphism from Stab(Z) onto Stab(Z).
     (3) The projection G ։ G                                               b
                                                                                 b The proof
   The next result studies the structure of loxodromic subgroups in the quotient G.
follows very closely the proof of [Cou16b, Proposition 5.26].
Lemma 4.20. (Compare [Cou16b, Proposition 5.26]) Let E     b be a loxodromic subgroup of G,
                                                                                         b Fb its
maximal normal finite subgroup. Then one of the following holds.
   (1) There exists a loxodromic subgroup E of G such that the projection G ։ G     b induces an
       isomorphism from E onto E  b (in particular, it induces an isomorphism from the maximal
       normal finite subgroup F of E onto Fb ).
          NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                         19


    (2) There exists a pair (H, Y ) in Q with the following property: there is a finite normal subgroup
        F ′ of Stab(Y ) such that its image is a subgroup of index at most 2 in Fb. Moreover, if
        Stab(Y ) is of cyclic type, then Fb coincides with the image of F ′ .

Proof. Let E b be a loxodromic subgroup of G   b and let Fb be the maximal normal ﬁnite subgroup of
 b Now, since E
E.               b normalizes Fb, then C b is invariant under E. b Thus, E  b ≤ Stab(C b ). Moreover,
                                           F                                             F
                         b
by Lemma 3.27, CFb is 9δ-quasi-convex.
   Suppose now that for every vb ∈ vb(Q) we have that CFb does not intersect B(b     v , ρ/10). By the
choice of ρ, we have that ρ/10 > ρ/20 + 19δ,   b so we can apply Lemma 4.19 to get a subgroup E
of G such that the projection G ։ G     b induces an isomorphism from E onto E.   b Write F for the
              b
preimage of F in E. Note that E normalizes F . Furthermore, as the preimage of a loxodromic
subgroup of G,b by Theorem 4.15 (5) E is loxodromic. Therefore, we are in the ﬁrst case.
   Assume now there is some vb ∈ b   v (Q) such that CFb intersects B(bv , ρ/10). Let x
                                                                                      b be a point in
                                 b ∈ Fb, the triangle inequality gives
this intersection. Then, for all u
                 d(b
                   v, u
                      b · vb) ≤ d(b
                                  v, x
                                     b) + d(b
                                            x, u
                                               b·x
                                                 b) + d(b
                                                        u·x
                                                          b, u v ) ≤ ρ/5 + 11δb < 2ρ.
                                                             b·b
Thus, since G  b acts on vb(Q) and the distance between distinct apices is at least 2ρ, then u b must be
in Stab(bv ). Let (H, Y ) ∈ Q be a pair such that the image of the apex of its cone on X    b is vb.
    Suppose now that Fb contains an element u  b that is not the image of an elliptic element of Stab(Y ).
Then, by Lemma 4.18, a power u                                                           b
                                   bk of this element has its axis contained in the 6δ-neighbourhood
                                                                                   b
of vb. This implies that the characteristic subset CFb is contained in the 15δ-neighbourhood of vb:
indeed, for x ∈ CFb we have d(x, uk (x)) ≤ 11δ (by deﬁnition of CFb ), thus by Proposition 3.10 in
[Cou16b] the distance between x and the axis of uk is at most 8.5δ; now, since the axis of uk is
                    b
contained in the 6δ-neighbourhood     of vb, we get d(x, vb) ≤ 14.5δ. By Lemma 3.34, the cylinder Ybg is
                      b
contained in the 51δ-neighbourhood     of the CFb . But Ybg has bi-inﬁnite local quasi-geodesics joining
gb±∞ , so it is not contained in a bounded set.
    Therefore, Fb cannot contain an element u  b that is not the image of an elliptic element of Stab(Y ).
Now by Remark 4.16 we are in the second case.                                                          

  The next result uses the techniques from [Cou16b, Proposition 5.14] for WPD actions on hy-
perbolic length spaces, and in [DGO17, Proposition 5.33] for acylindrical actions on hyperbolic
geodesic spaces.
Lemma 4.21. Suppose that there exists m ∈ N such that |Stab(b
                                                            v )| ≤ m for all vb ∈ vb(Q). Then,
              b    b
the action of G on X is acylindrical.
Proof. We will apply Remark 3.29. The action of G on the cone-oﬀ Ẋ is acylindrical, therefore,
there are positive numbers M ′ and L′ such that, for all x, x′ ∈ Ẋ, if dẊ (x, x′ ) is at least L′ , then
there are at most M ′ elements moving x and x′ less than 100δ.   b We will show that we can take
           ′         ′
max{m, M } and L as the parameters M and L of Remark 3.29.
   Now, let ba, bb ∈ X b be at distance at least L′ , and consider the set Yb = hull({a, b}). By
                        b
Lemma 3.18, it is a 6δ-quasi-convex               b Moreover, by Lemma 3.13, for every x
                                       subset of X.                                               b ∈ Yb ,
every element b     b
               g ∈ G moving b        b                b
                              a and b by at most 100δ will move x b by at most 600δ.    b
   Suppose that there is vb ∈ vb(Q) lying in the closed ρ/10-neighbourhood of Yb , and let b    c ∈ Yb be
at distance at most ρ/10 of vb. Then, we get from the triangle inequality that
                            d(b
                              g · vb, b
                                      v ) ≤ 2d(b
                                               c, b
                                                  v ) + d(b
                                                          g·b
                                                            c, b             b
                                                               c) ≤ ρ/5 + 600δ.
Recall that ρ ≥ max({ρ0 , 1010 δ, 1020 LS δ}) and δb = 64 · 104δ. Therefore, ρ/5 + 600δb (and thus also
  g · vb, vb)) is less than 2ρ, and this quantity is a lower bound for the distance between apices. In
d(b
consequence, gb ﬁxes vb, and therefore, there can only be m such elements.
20                          MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


   Now suppose that, for all vb ∈ vb(Q), Yb does not intersect B(bv , ρ/10). By the choice of ρ, we
have that ρ/20 + 610δ < ρ/10, thus we can apply Lemma 4.19 with d = 600δb and α = 6δ:
                    b                                                                      b if some
    b
g ∈ G moves b
b                  b                  b                                   b
             a and b by at most 100δ, then gb · Y lies in the closed 600δ-neighbourhood of Yb (by
                                                 b
Lemma 3.13), and by Lemma 4.19 we can ﬁnd preimages a and b of b       a and bb respectively, with
                                                        a, bb) ≥ L′ ,
                                      dẊ (a, b) = dXb (b
and such that there is a preimage g of gb in G satisfying
                                  dẊ (g · a, a) = dXb (b
                                                        g ·b  a) ≤ 100δb
                                                           a, b
and
                                                        g · bb, bb) ≤ 100δ.
                                  dẊ (g · b, b) = dXb (b                b
By the choice of L , there can be at most M ′ such elements g, yielding that there can be at most
                    ′

M ′ elements b
             g moving both b a and bb at most 100δ.
                                                 b                                             

   We now want to ﬁnd a bound for the injectivity radius of the images of certain subsets of N
(recall that N is a normal subgroup of G that has no involution, as deﬁned at the beginning of
Section 4.3). The following technical deﬁnition isolates the properties that a subset Q of N needs
to have so that we can bound the injectivity radius of its image in terms of the injectivity radius of
Q. In our applications in Section 5, we will take for G a group in class ST ′ (p) (or in an auxiliary
class ST ′0 (p) that will be deﬁned in that section), for Q the set of translations, and for N the
subgroup of G generated by translations.
Definition 4.22. Let Q be a subset of N and Q    b be its image in G.
                                                                    b We say that Q is stable with
respect to Q if the following property is satisﬁed: let b                              b Suppose
                                                        g be a non-elliptic element of Q.
                                                                b
there is a subset A of Ẋ such that the projection ζ : Ẋ −→ X induces an isometry from A onto
the axis Abgm for some m ∈ N and the projection G ։ G      b induces an isomorphism from Stab(A)
onto Stab(Abgm ). Let g be the preimage of b
                                           g in Stab(A). Then g ∈ Q.
   We will prove in Lemma 5.1 that in our setting the set of translations is stable in the sense of
Deﬁnition 4.22 (with respect to an appropriate family Q).
   Let us remark that being a stable subset may depend on the speciﬁc family Q we are consid-
ering. However, if the family Q is clear by context, we may omit mentioning it explicitly. Notice
also that a subgroup of N containing K will be a stable subset. In particular, N is a stable sub-
set independently of the family in consideration. The next lemma slightly generalizes [Cou16b,
Proposition 5.31].
Lemma 4.23. (Compare [Cou16b, Proposition 5.31]) Let Q be a stable subset of N . Denote by l
the infimum over the asymptotic translation length in X of loxodromic elements of Q that do not
                                                                        b If every preimage of gb in
belong to Stab(Y ) for (H, Y ) ∈ Q. Let gb be a non-elliptic element of Q.
G is loxodromic, then we have
                                                                
                                                      lδb
                                   g ]∞ ≥ min
                                  [b                          , δb .
                                                           b
                                                  πsinh(26δ)
Proof. As stated before, this lemma appears in [Cou16b] as Proposition 5.31 taking the stable
subset Q to be the whole subgroup N . However, the proof works with no further change if we put
Q in place of N , since we have included ad hoc in Deﬁnition 4.22 the property that we need for
this to happen.                                                                              

     From this result we immediately obtain the following corollary and the desired bound.
Corollary 4.24. Let Q be a stable subset of N . Denote by l the infimum over the asymptotic
translation length in X of loxodromic elements of Q that do not belong to Stab(Y ) for (H, Y ) ∈ Q.
          NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                         21


Then we have                                                          
                                      b X)
                                         b ≥ min            lδb       b
                                rinj (Q,                             ,δ   .
                                                                b
                                                        πsinh(26δ)
4.4. Small Cancellation and Partial Periodic Quotients.
4.4.1. Small cancellation quotients (SC-quotients).
Proposition 4.25. (Compare [Cou16b, Proposition 6.1]) There exist positive constants ρ0 , δ1
and LS such that for every integer ν0 there is an integer n0 such that the following holds:
   Suppose G is a group acting by isometries on a δ1 -hyperbolic length space X such that this
action is WPD and non-elementary. Let N be a normal subgroup of G without involutions, Q a
conjugation invariant set of elements of N , and let P be the subset of loxodromic elements h of Q
which are primitive as elements of N and such that [h] ≤ LS δ1 . Let n1 ≥ n0 and n ≥ n1 be odd
and suppose furthermore that:
    (1) e(N, X) divides n,
    (2) ν(N, X) ≤ ν0 ,
    (3) A(N, X) ≤ 6πν0 q sinh(2LS δ1 ),
                             LS sinh(ρ0 )
    (4) rinj (Q, X) ≥ 2δ1   n1 sinh(26δ1 ) .

   Let K = hhn : h ∈ P iG , put G  b = G/K and let N    b, Q b denote the images of N and Q under the
quotient map. Then N    b contains no involution and there exists a δ1 -hyperbolic length space X b such
                 b N
that the tuple (G,  b , Q,
                        b X)
                           b satisfies the conditions (1) – (3) of this proposition with N   b and X b in
place of N and X respectively.
                                                                                             b N
   Additionally, if Q is stable with respect to Q = {(hhn i, Yh ) : h ∈ P }, then the tuple (G, b , Q,
                                                                                                    b X)
                                                                                                       b
                                b     b
satisfies condition (4) with Q and X in place of Q and X respectively.
   Moreover, the quotient map G → G,     b g 7→ b
                                                g has the following properties.
       • For g ∈ G, we have
                                           s                            
                                      1    4π    sinh(ρ 0 ) sinh(26δ  )
                                                                      1 
                             g ]∞
                            [b  b ≤ √
                                X
                                                                           [g]∞
                                                                              X.
                                      n 1 δ1                LS

      • For every non-loxodromic elementary subgroup E of G, the quotient map G → G           b induces
                                                    b
         an isomorphism from E onto its image E which is elementary and non-loxodromic.
                                                                  b . Either gbn = 1 or gb is the image
      • Let gb be an elliptic (respectively parabolic) element of N
         of an elliptic (respectively parabolic) element of N .
      • Let u, u′ ∈ N be such that [u] < LS δ1 and u′ is elliptic. If u  b and u b′ are conjugate in G b
                              ′
         then so are u and u in G.
   Furthermore, if the action of G on X is acylindrical, and if there is some positive integer m such
that for all h ∈ P we have |Stab(Yh )/hhn i| ≤ m, then the action of G b on X  b is also acylindrical.

Proof. First of all, note that Proposition 6.1 in [Cou16b] involves three constants A0 , r0 , α that do
not appear in Proposition 4.25 above, while Proposition 4.25 involves a constant ρ0 that does not
appear in [Cou16b, Proposition 6.1]. This diﬀerence is purely cosmetic, since the constants A0 , r0 , α
can be expressed explicitly in terms of LS , δ1 , ρ0 (and we refer the reader to the very beginning of
the proof of Proposition 6.1 in [Cou16b] for the explicit formulas), and the assumptions (1) to (4)
above are simply a rewriting of the assumptions (1) to (4) in [Cou16b, Proposition 6.1] in terms
of ρ0 instead of A0 , r0 , α, and with Q in place of N in the case of assumption (4).
   With this in mind the proof of Proposition 6.1 in [Cou16b] works for Proposition 4.25 modulo
some mostly minor changes. We include some details of the proof, focusing on the construction of
           b and we refer to the proof of Proposition 6.1 in [Cou16b] whenever parts of this proof
the space X,
work exactly as in that case.
22                         MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


   Fix a positive integer ν0 . We will deﬁne a rescaling parameter λ for the space X. For a positive
integer k, we put                          s
                                         4π sinh(ρ0 ) sinh(26δ1 )
                                  λk =                             .
                                          δ1            kLS
Now, we set the critical exponent n0 as the smallest integer greater than 100 such that for every
integer k ≥ n0 we have
                                               λk δ1 ≤ δ0 ,
                     λk (6πν0 sinh(2LS δ1 ) + 118δ1 ) ≤ min{∆0 , π sinh(2LS δ1 )},
                                                LS δ12
                                        λk                  ≤ δ1 ,
                                            2π sinh(26δ1 )
and
                                               λk ρ0 ≤ ρ0 ,
where the parameters ρ0 , δ0 and ∆0 are the ones appearing in Lemma 4.15. Let n1 ≥ n0 and
n ≥ n1 be an odd integer, and write λ = λn1 .
   Let G be a group with a normal subgroup N acting on a hyperbolic space X, and let Q be a
family of conjugation invariant elements of N . Assume that (G, N, Q, X) satisﬁes the assumptions
of Proposition 4.25 for ν0 and n. Remember that we denote by G     b the quotient of G by the normal
                               n
subgroup K generated by {h : h ∈ P }, where P is as in the statement of the proposition. Since
P ⊆ N , K is a (normal) subgroup of N , and we write N      b = N/K.
   We consider for the rest of this proof the action of G on the rescaled space λX (unless explicitly
stated otherwise). This is a δ-hyperbolic space with δ = λδ1 ≤ δ0 . We denote by Q the family
Q = {(hhn i, Yh ) : h ∈ P }. We claim that this family satisﬁes ∆(Q) ≤ ∆0 and T (Q) ≥ 8π sinh(ρ0 ).
The proof of the ﬁrst inequality works exactly as in Lemma 6.2 in [Cou16b]. For the second
inequality, notice that by Remark 4.7, assumption (4) and the choice of n we have
                                              8π sinh(ρ0 )   8π sinh(ρ0 )
                             rinj (Q, λX) ≥                ≥              .
                                                   n1             n
Thus, since P is a subset of Q, for all h ∈ P we get [hn ]∞ = n[h]∞ ≥ 8π sinh(ρ0 ), from which the
desired inequality follows.
   On account of this, we can apply Lemma 4.15 to the action of G on λX and the family Q, so
we denote by Ẋ the cone-oﬀ or radius ρ0 over X relative to the family {Y : (H, Y ) ∈ Q}, and we
set Xb as the quotient of Ẋ by K.
   The proof that G,b N b and X b satisfy the required properties now follows exactly as in the proof
of Proposition 6.1 in [Cou16b].
   In particular, the results from Lemma 4.15 to Lemma 4.24 apply to the action of G    b on X.
                                                                                              b
   Suppose now that G acts acylindrically on X. Then by Proposition 4.25, and the facts that
acylindricity is preserved by rescalings and that, by Lemmas 4.14 and 4.21, the acylindricity of
the action is also preserved by the cone-oﬀ construction (for G) and by the SC-quotient (for G,  b if
there exists a bound for |Stab(Yh )/hh i|) respectively.
                                        n

   Finally, assume that Q is stable with respect to Q. If g is a loxodromic isometry of Q that does
not belong to Stab(Y ) for any (H, Y ) ∈ Q, then by Lemma 3.22, its asymptotic translation length
satisﬁes
                                        [g]∞ ≥ λ(LS δ1 − 32δ1 ).
The choice of LS now implies [g]∞ ≥ LS δ1 /2 and we obtained the required estimate from Corol-
lary 4.24 and the choice of n1 .                                                                   
   Terminology. For the remainder of the article, we call a group obtained as the quotient of a
group G as provided by Proposition 4.25 a small cancellation quotient (or simply an SC-quotient )
                               b Similarly, if X is the length space on which G acts, we will write
of G, and we will denote it by G.
b
X for the length space on which G b acts.
           NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                         23


   Notice that by Proposition 4.25, the quotient group G b and the hyperbolic space X
                                                                                    b on which it
acts exist whether the family Q is stable with respect to Q or not. However, we want to apply
Proposition 4.25 iteratively when proving Theorem 4.28, and for this purpose we will need to take
               b Therefore, we need to bound the injectivity radius of Q,
a quotient of G.                                                         b and to this purpose is
that we need to assume the stability of Q. In particular, we will have that if Q  b is stable with
             b                                          b
respect to Q (where this family is constructed from Q exactly as Q was constructed from Q),
       b N
then (G,  b , Q,
              b X)
                 b satisﬁes all assumptions of Proposition 4.25. This observation also motivates
the following strengthening of Deﬁnition 4.22 for stable families.
Definition 4.26. Let Q be a subset of N . We say that Q is strongly stable if the following property
holds.
   Suppose {G b i : 0 ≤ i ≤ k} is a ﬁnite sequence of quotients obtained from G = G     b 0 by successive
                                                             b
applications of Lemma 4.15, where the space on which G0 acts is (a possibly rescaled version of)
X, and the space X  bi+1 on which G b i+1 acts is (a possibly rescaled version of) the space X  b provided
by Lemma 4.15 when we consider the action of G       bi on Xbi . Suppose furthermore that at step i the
family Qi was built by taking the subsets Hi of G     bi to be the n-th power of a loxodromic element
b                         b
h in the image of Q in Gi that is primitive as an element of the image N     bi of N in Gb i , and Y is the
cylinder of this n-th power.
   Then the image Q   b i of Q in G
                                  bi is stable with respect to Qi .

Corollary 4.27. If the tuple (G, N, Q, X) satisfies the assumptions of Proposition 4.25 and Q is
                               b N
strongly stable, then so does (G, b , Q,
                                      b X),
                                         b and Q
                                               b is strongly stable as well.

  Thus, under the assumption that Q is strongly stable, we can indeed iterate the application of
Proposition 4.25.
4.4.2. Partial periodic quotients (PP-quotients).
Theorem 4.28. (Compare [Cou16b, Theorem 6.9]) Let X be a δ-hyperbolic length space. Let G
be a group acting by isometries on X. We suppose that this action is WPD and non-elementary.
Let N be a normal subgroup of G without involutions, and Q be a conjugation invariant strongly
stable subset of N . In addition we assume that e(N, X) is odd, ν(N, X) and A(N, X) are finite and
rinj (Q, X) is positive. There exist a normal subgroup K of G contained in N and a critical exponent
n1 that only depends on δ, ν(N, X), A(N, X) and rinj (Q, X) such that for every odd integer n ≥ n1
which is a multiple of e(N, X) the following holds:
     (1) if E is an elementary subgroup of G which is not loxodromic, then the projection G ։ Ḡ =
         G/K induces an isomorphism from E onto its image;
     (2) every non-trivial element of K is loxodromic;
     (3) for every element ḡ of finite order in the image N̄ of N in Ḡ, either ḡ n = 1 or ḡ is the
         image of an elliptic element of N . Moreover, for every element h in Q, either its image h̄
         in N̄ satisfies h̄n = 1 or it is identified with the image of a non-loxodromic element of N ;
     (4) there are infinitely many elements in N̄ which do not belong to the image of an elementary
         non-loxodromic subgroup of G.
  Notice that the third consequence of Theorem 4.28 implies that N̄ contains no involution since
N contains no involution and n is odd.
Proof of Theorem 4.28. We will obtain Theorem 4.28 by iterated applications of Proposition 4.25.
More speciﬁcally, by putting G = G0 , and building a sequence (Gi )i∈N where we get Gi+1 from
Gi by adding new relations of the form hn with h a loxodromic element of the image of Q in Gi
that is primitive as an element of the image of N in this quotient. The group Ḡ in Theorem 4.28
is deﬁned as the limit of this sequence.
   We now give the details of the construction and refer the reader to the proof of Theorem 6.9 in
[Cou16b] whenever parts of it work exactly as in that case.
24                         MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


   Keeping the same notation for the constants LS , ρ0 and δ1 as in Proposition 4.25, we let
X0 = λ′ X be a rescaled version of X where the rescaling constant λ′ is the greatest real number such
that δ ′ ≤ δ1 and A(N, X0 ) ≤ 6πν0 sinh(2LS δ1 ). Thus, in X0 the hyperbolicity constant is δ ′ = λ′ δ,
while the invariants satisfy e(N, X0 ) = e(N, X), ν(N, X0 ) = ν(N, X), rinj (Q, X0 ) = λ′ rinj (Q, X)
and A(N, X0 ) = λ′ A(N, X). We write ν0 = ν(N, X). The critical exponent n1 is deﬁned as the
smallest positive integer such that
                                                     s
                                                        LS sinh(ρ0 )
                                 rinj (Q, X0 ) ≥ 2δ1
                                                       n1 sinh(26δ1 )

and
                                       s                       
                                   1  4π sinh(ρ0 ) sinh(26δ1 ) 
                               1< √                               .
                                   n 1 δ1          LS

We will write c1 for the constant appearing in the ﬁrst of these equations and c2 for the constant ap-
pearing in the second one. Notice that indeed the value of n1 only depends on δ, ν(N, X), A(N, X)
and rinj (Q, X). Fix an odd integer n ≥ n1 that is a multiple of e(N, X). Denote by P0 the
(conjugation invariant) set of elements h in Q0 that are loxodromic, primitive as elements of N0
and that satisfy [h] ≤ LS δ1 . Set Q0 = {(hhn i, Yhn ) : h ∈ P0 }. Since Q is a strongly stable subset
of N , the set Q0 is again strongly stable with respect to Q0 . Thus, by construction, and with
N0 = N and Q0 = Q, the tuple (G0 , N0 , Q0 , X0 ) satisﬁes the assumptions of Proposition 4.25 for
ν0 , exponent n and the family Q0 .
    Now assume that we have constructed a group Gi acting on a hyperbolic space Xi in such a way
that the tuple (Gi , Ni , Qi , Xi ) satisﬁes the assumptions of Proposition 4.25 for ν0 and exponent n
(except that we do not require a priori Qi to be stable with respect to some family), where Ni
and Qi are the images of N0 and Q0 respectively in Gi . Suppose that furthermore that for all
0 < j ≤ i, the group Gj has been obtained as a quotient of Gj−1 by a subgroup K ′ = hh′n iGj−1
where h is a loxodromic element of the image of Q in Gj−1 that are primitive as elements of Nj−1 .
Denote by Pi the (conjugation invariant) set of elements h in Qi that are loxodromic, primitive as
elements of Ni and that satisfy [h] ≤ LS δ1 . Put Qi = {(hhn i, Yhn ) : h ∈ Pi }. Since Q is a strongly
stable subset, Qi is again strongly stable with respect to Qi , so indeed the tuple (Gi , Ni , Qi , Xi )
satisﬁes the assumptions of Proposition 4.25 for ν0 , exponent n and Qi . Let Ki = hhn : h ∈ Pi iGi .
By Proposition 4.25, the quotient Gi+1 = Gi /Ki acts on a hyperbolic space Xi+1 , and if we write
Ni+1 = Ni /Ki and Qi+1 for the image of Q in Gi+1 , then the tuple (Gi+1 , Ni+1 , Qi+1 , Xi+1 )
satisﬁes the assumptions of Proposition 4.25 for ν0 and exponent n (except that similarly we do
not require a priori Qi+1 to be stable with respect to some family). Thus, we get a well-deﬁned
sequence (Gi )i∈N .
    Let Ḡ be the limit of the sequence (Gi )i∈N , so Ḡ is a quotient of G by a normal subgroup K
contained in N . We claim that this group satisﬁes the required properties. The proofs of Properties
(1) and (2) work exactly as in the case of Theorem 6.9 in [Cou16b]. For Property (4), it is enough
to notice that this claim holds even for the set of all loxodromic elements of N , as is the case in
Theorem 6.9 in [Cou16b].
    It only remains to prove Property (3). A simple inductive argument using Proposition 4.25
shows that if g ′ is an elliptic (respectively parabolic) element of Ni , then either g ′n = 1 or g ′ is
the image of an elliptic (respectively parabolic) element of N . Let now ḡ be an element of ﬁnite
order of N̄ which is not the image of an elliptic element of N . Denote by g a preimage of this
element in N , and denote by gi the image of g in Ni . Notice that g must be loxodromic, since
otherwise it would be a parabolic element (thus of inﬁnite order) and the projection would induce
an isomorphism of hgi onto its image hḡi. If gi was of inﬁnite order for all i ∈ N, then ḡ would
be of inﬁnite order, so there exists j ∈ N such that gj is of ﬁnite order. Now the ﬁrst claim of
Property (3) follows from the second and third consequences of Proposition 4.25.
          NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                          25


   For the second part of this property, assume moreover that, under the notation of the previous
paragraph, ḡ is in Q̄. By the way the sequence (Gi )i∈N was constructed, we have [gi ] ≤ (c2 )i [g].
Therefore, there exists j ∈ N such that [gj ] < c1 = rinj (Qj , Xj ). In particular, since gj ∈ Qj , it is
not loxodromic. It also cannot be parabolic (since once again, this would give that ḡ is of inﬁnite
order), so it must be elliptic, and once again the desired conclusion follows from the second and
third consequences of Proposition 4.25.                                                                 
   Terminology. For the remainder of the article, we will call a group obtained as the quotient
of a group G as provided by Theorem 4.28 a partial periodic quotient (or simply a PP-quotient ) of
G, and we will denote it by Ḡ.

                                  5. Proof of Proposition 2.15
  The main purpose of this section is to prove Proposition 2.15, which we recall here.
Proposition 2.15. Let G be a group acting on a tree X in such a way that the pair (G, X)
belongs to ST ′ (p). Then G has a quotient Ḡ ∈ ST (p) such that the image of every pair of distinct
involutions of p-affine type (respectively, of p-minimal type) is again of p-affine type (respectively,
of p-minimal type), any subgroup of G that is elliptic for the action of G on X projects to an
isomorphic image in Ḡ and O(G) = O(Ḡ).
   In order to prove Proposition 2.15, we will apply Theorem 4.28 with N = hT r(G)i and Q =
T r(G). The reason why we don’t simply take Q = N as in [Cou16b] is illustrated by the following
example: if i, j, k are three (pairwise distinct) involutions of G, then (ijk)2 belongs to N and it
may happen that (ijk)2 is primitive in N (note that ijk does not belong to N , otherwise N would
contain an involution), but we don’t want to add the relation ((ijk)2 )p = 1 in our quotient because
this would create a new involution, namely (ijk)p , over which we have no control (for instance,
such an involution would have no reason to be conjugate to the other involutions), and thus this
would break the conditions deﬁning our classes of groups.
   In order to apply Theorem 4.28 we need to show that Q is strongly stable, and to do so we
need to consider the intermediate small cancellation quotients obtained using Proposition 4.25.
However, a pair (G,b X)
                      b obtained from a pair (G, X) in ST ′ (p) does not belong to ST ′ (p) (because
Xb is not a tree). For this reason we introduce a new auxiliary class ST ′0 (p) containing ST ′ (p), and
we will prove that this new class is stable under the small cancellation quotients obtained using
Proposition 4.25.
Definition 5.1 (Class ST ′0 (p)). Let G′ be a group acting by isometries on a δ1 -hyperbolic length
space X ′ (with δ1 the constant from Proposition 4.25). Write N ′ = hT r(G′ )i and Q′ = T r(G′ ).
We say that (G′ , X ′ ) belongs to the class ST ′0 (p) if it satisﬁes the conditions of the class ST ′ (p)
where Condition (2’) is replaced by Condition (2”):
   (2”) The tuple (G′ , N ′ , Q′ , X ′ ) satisﬁes the assumptions of Proposition 4.25 for ν0 = 5 and
        exponent p, except that Q′ is not required a priori to be stable with respect to Q′ .
Remark 5.2. Notice that if we want to obtain a PP-quotient of a group in ST ′ (p) by iteratively
obtaining SC-quotients of groups in ST ′0 (p), then we will need the family Q′ to be stable with
respect to Q′ (where this family is obtained from Q′ exactly as Q is obtained from Q in Proposition
4.25). However, we will see that this property follows directly from the other conditions deﬁning
ST ′0 (p), so we do not need to include it explicitly in the deﬁnition above.
  At the end of this section we will also obtain Lemma 5.17, that implies in particular that the
sharply 2-transitive groups constructed in Theorem 2.17 do not split.
5.1. Stability of the Class ST ′0 (p) under SC-Quotients. In this subsection we will show
that the new class ST ′0 (p) deﬁned above is stable under SC-quotients. We ﬁx a group G′ acting
on a hyperbolic space X ′ in such a way that the pair (G′ , X ′ ) belongs to ST ′0 (p), and we write
26                           MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


N ′ = hT r(G′ )i and Q′ = T r(G′ ). The following result is the crucial induction step for the proof of
Proposition 2.15.
                                                                                                   b′ , X
Proposition 5.3. If (G′ , X ′ ) is in class ST ′0 (p), then so is its small cancellation quotient (G    b ′)
given by Proposition 4.25. Moreover, the image of every pair of distinct involutions of p-affine
type (respectively, of p-minimal type) is again of p-affine type (respectively, of p-minimal type),
and O(G′ ) = O(G  b′ ).
   We need some preliminary lemmas. We ﬁrst give a classiﬁcation of the loxodromic subgroups
of G′ .
Lemma 5.4. Let E be a loxodromic subgroup of G′ . Then, E is isomorphic to one of the following
four groups: Z, C2 × Z, D∞ or C4 ∗C2 C4 .
Proof. By Lemma 3.33, we know that E is virtually cyclic and thus there exists a (necessarily
normal) ﬁnite subgroup C of E such that E ≃ C ⋊ Z or E ≃ A ∗C B with [A : C] = [B : C] = 2.
But C has order at most 2 by Condition (4’) of Deﬁnition 5.1. Moreover, by Condition (1)
of Deﬁnition 2.4, no two involutions of G′ commute, which leads to the four possibilities listed
above.                                                                                        
     Note that among these four groups, only D∞ contains two distinct involutions.
                                        b ′ . Then Stab(b
Lemma 5.5. Let vb ∈ vb(Q) be an apex of X               v ) is isomorphic to Dp .
Proof. Note that if h = ij ∈ N ′ is a loxodromic translation that is primitive in N ′ (where i, j
are two distinct involutions), then the setwise stabilizer S of the pair {h±∞ } ⊂ ∂G′ contains
two distinct involutions (namely i and j), thus by Lemma 5.4 and the subsequent remark it is
isomorphic to D∞ . It follows that S = hi, ji since h is primitive in N ′ (and as a consequence, h
is also primitive in G′ ). Now, let vb ∈ vb(Q) be an apex of Xb ′ . By the construction of the cone-oﬀ
                                                     ′
(see Section 4.3), and by our choice of the set Q , there exists a primitive loxodromic translation
h = ij ∈ N ′ (where i, j are two distinct involutions) such that (hhp i, Yh ) belongs to Q and Stab(b
                                                                                                    v)
is the quotient of the setwise stabilizer of the pair {h±∞ } ∈ ∂G′ by the normal subgroup generated
by hp . It follows from the previous paragraph that Stab({h±∞ }) = hi, j | i2 = j 2 = 1i. Therefore,
Stab(bv ) = hi, j | i2 = j 2 = (ij)p = 1i ≃ Dp .                                                     
     The next lemma follows easily from the previous lemma and from item (7) of Lemma 4.15.
Lemma 5.6. Let Fb be an elliptic subgroup of Gb′ . Then one of the following holds:
  (1) there exists an elliptic subgroup F of G′ such that the quotient map G′ ։ G   b ′ induces an
      isomorphism from F onto F ,  b
  (2) Fb is isomorphic to Cp or Dp .
Proof. As a consequence of item (7) of Lemma 4.15, we only need to take care of the case when
Fb is contained in Stab(b   v ) for some vb ∈ vb(Q). By Lemma 5.5, Stab(b        v ) is isomorphic to Dp ,
thus Fb is either trivial or isomorphic to C2 or Cp or Dp . More precisely, there is a primitive
loxodromic translation h ∈ N such that Stab(b       v ) is the quotient of the setwise stabilizer S of the
pair {h±∞ } ∈ ∂G′ by the normal subgroup generated by hp . By Lemma 5.4 S is an inﬁnite
dihedral group. We need to prove that if Fb is trivial or isomorphic to C2 , then there exists an
elliptic subgroup F of G′ such that the projection G′ ։ G       b′ induces an isomorphism from F onto
Fb . This is obvious if Fb is trivial, so let us assume that Fb is isomorphic to C2 , and write Fb = hii
for some involution i of G b′ . Let g be a preimage of i in S. Note that g cannot have inﬁnite order,
otherwise it would be mapped to an element of order 1 or p in Fb . Thus g is an involution and the
projection G′ ։ G  b ′ induces an isomorphism from F = hgi onto Fb = hii.                               
Lemma 5.7. Let b
               g ∈ Stab(b
                        v ) for some vb ∈ vb(Q) be of order > 2. Then, vb is the only apex of vb(Q)
fixed by gb.
           NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                              27


Proof. Recall that there is a primitive loxodromic translation h such that Stab(b  v ) is the quotient
of Stab(Yh ) by its subgroup normally generated by hp , and Stab(Yh ) is dihedral inﬁnite by Lemma
5.4 (with hhi as a subgroup of index 2). In particular, the only elliptic elements of Stab(Yh ) are
the involutions, and thus gb is not the image of an elliptic element of Stab(Yh ). Therefore, by
Lemma 4.18, vb is the unique apex of vb(Q) ﬁxed by gb.                                              

   We can now prove the following result (which is the ﬁrst part of Proposition 5.3).
                                                         b′ , X
Proposition 5.8. If (G′ , X ′ ) ∈ ST ′0 (p), then so is (G    b ′ ).

                       b′ , X
Proof. We verify that (G    b ′ ) satisﬁes the conditions of Deﬁnition 5.1 of ST ′0 (p).
                    b ′ on X
(1’): the action of G      b ′ is acylindrical.

   This is a consequence of Theorem 4.25 and Lemma 5.5, since this lemma implies that for all
h ∈ P , we have |Stab(Yh )/hhp i| = 2p.
                                       b ′ are loxodromic for their action on X
(3’): translations of inﬁnite order of G                                      b ′.
                                                                                       b′ such that ij
    Assume towards a contradiction that there exist two distinct involutions i 6= j in G
is elliptic and has inﬁnite order. Since hiji is a subgroup of ﬁnite index of Di,j this last subgroup
is also elliptic, and by Lemma 5.6 it must lift to an elliptic subgroup of G′ . This would yield an
elliptic translation of G′ of inﬁnite order, contradicting Condition (3’) for the pair (G′ , X ′ ) and
thus the assumption that it belongs to ST ′0 (p).
                               b′ normalizes a non-trivial ﬁnite subgroup Fb of order > 2.
(4’): no loxodromic element of G
   This follows directly from Lemma 4.20. Indeed, since the pair (G′ , X ′ ) is in class ST ′0 (p), every
maximal normal ﬁnite subgroup of a loxodromic subgroup of G′ is of order at most two. Moreover,
the maximal normal ﬁnite subgroup of every Stab(Y ) for (H, Y ) ∈ Q is trivial, since it contains
two involutions and thus by Lemma 5.4 it has to be isomorphic to D∞ .
                                                b′ , X
Remark 5.9. Since we have proved that the pair (G    b ′ ) satisﬁes Condition (4’) of Deﬁnition 2.13
and Condition (1) of Deﬁnition 2.4, the loxodromic subgroups of G    b′ also satisfy the classiﬁcation
exhibited in Lemma 5.4.
                 b′ , N
(2”): the tuple (G    b ′, Q
                           b′ , X
                                b ′ ) satisﬁes the assumptions of Proposition 4.25 for ν0 = 5 and expo-
nent p (except that Q b ′ is not required a priori to be stable with respect to a family Q b′ ).

   It only remains to be proved that Q′ is stable with respect to Q to get the bound on the
injectivity radius of Qb ′ . Let gb be a loxodromic element of the image Q   b ′ of Q′ in G
                                                                                          b′ . As a non-
trivial image of a translation, it is itself a loxodromic translation. As such, for every m ∈ N we will
have that Stab(Abgm ) is the maximal loxodromic subgroup containing b     g. By Remark 5.9, this has to
be an inﬁnite dihedral group. Thus, if we have a subset A of Ẋ such that the projection G′ ։ G
                                                                    ′                                 b′
induces an isomorphism from Stab(A) onto Stab(Abg ), then Stab(A) is an inﬁnite dihedral group
                                                         m

and thus the preimage g of b   g in Stab(A) is a translation of inﬁnite order. Thus, g ∈ Q′ and indeed
              ′
the family Q is stable with respect to Q.
                     b′ , X
   We now show that (G    b ′ ) is almost sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p.

(4): for (b           b′ )(2) , Cen(b
          r , sb) ∈ I(G             r sb) is cyclic and generated by a translation.
          b′ , X
   Since (G    b ′ ) satisﬁes Condition (3’) a translation rbsb either has ﬁnite order or is loxodromic.
       b
   Let h ∈ Cen(b    r sb). If rbsb is of ﬁnite order, then b
                                                           h cannot be loxodromic since (G   b′ , X
                                                                                                  b ′ ) satisﬁes
Condition (4’), namely no loxodromic element of G           b normalizes a non-trivial ﬁnite subgroup of
                                                             ′

                                                    b
order > 2. Also, if rbsb is of ﬁnite order and h is elliptic, then so is E     r sb, b
                                                                          b = hb     hi since it contains hb  hi
as a ﬁnite index subgroup. We now distinguish four cases.
28                                  MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


   Case 1 : Drb,bs is loxodromic. Then b    h is in the maximal loxodromic subgroup containing Drb,bs . By
Remark 5.9, this subgroup is isomorphic to D∞ , where the centralizer of any translation is cyclic
and generated by a translation.
   Case 2 : Drb,bs is elliptic and does not lift. Then there is some vb ∈ vb(Q) with Drb,bs = Stab(b          v ),
                                                                        b
and vb is the unique apex ﬁxed by rbsb by Lemma 5.7. Since h normalizes the subgroup hb              r sbi we get
b
h ∈ Stab(b  v ), and in this subgroup the centralizer of any translation is cyclic and generated by a
translation.
   Case 3 : Drb,bs is elliptic and lifts, but E   b does not lift. Note that E    b is elliptic (indeed, rbsb has
ﬁnite order, b  h is necessarily elliptic and hb  hi has ﬁnite index in E).  b Then there is some vb ∈ vb(Q)
       b
with E ⊂ Stab(b       v ). But Stab(b
                                    v ) is isomorphic to Dp , where the centralizer of any translation is
cyclic and generated by a translation.
   Case 4 : Drb,bs is elliptic and lifts, and E b lifts. Let r, s denote two involutions of G′ such that Dr,s
is a lift of Drb,bs , and let g be the preimage of rbsb in a preimage E of E.    b Notice that, since g maps
                        b
to an element of N in the quotient, then we must have g ∈ N . Now, g and rs are elliptic elements
of N such that their images are conjugate in G         b ′ , so by the fourth consequence of Proposition 4.25,
they are conjugate in G . In particular, g is a translation centralized by the preimage h of b
                             ′
                                                                                                         h. Since
G′ satisﬁes Condition (4), we get that h is in the cyclic subgroup Cen(g), and the claim follows.

(1): every translation is either of order p or of inﬁnite order, and every pair (b           b ′ )(2) such
                                                                                 r , sb) ∈ I(G
that rbsb has order p is either of p-aﬃne type or of p-minimal type.
     First, let us prove that the the order of a translation of G                 b ′ is either p or inﬁnite. Assume towards
a contradiction that i, j ∈ G           b are involutions such that ij has ﬁnite order 6= p. Then by Lemma 5.6
                                          ′

the group generated by i and j must lift to G′ , contradicting Condition (1) for G′ .
     Then, let (b  r , sb) ∈ I(G  b′ )(2) be such that rbsb has order p, and let us prove that (b                    r , sb) is either of
p-aﬃne type or of p-minimal type. Note that the subgroup Drb,bs is elliptic. We distinguish three
cases.
     Case 1 : the subgroup Drb,bs does not lift. Then by Lemma 5.6 there is some vb ∈ vb(Q) such that
Drb,bs = Stab(b    v ). By Lemma 5.7, vb is the only apex ﬁxed by rbsb, and thus NGb′ (hb                         r sbi) is contained
in Stab(b   v ). But note that Drb,bs is contained in NGb′ (hb             r sbi) since hb   r sbi is a characteristic subgroup of
Drb,bs . Thus, NGb′ (Drbsb) = Drb,bs , and therefore (b        r , sb) is of p-minimal type.
     Case 2 : the subgroup Drb,bs lifts and it has a preimage of p-aﬃne type. Let Dr,s be such a
preimage for involutions r, s ∈ G′ , then, by Remark 2.2 the normalizer NG′ (Dr,s ) is isomorphic
to AGL(1, Fp ), and in particular it is elliptic in G′ . Thus, the projection induces an isomorphism
from NG′ (Dr,s ) onto its image H, which contains Drb,bs , so (b                      r , sb) is itself of p-aﬃne type.
     Case 3 : the subgroup Drb,bs lifts and all its preimages are of p-minimal type. Let us assume
towards a contradiction that Drb,bs is not of p-minimal type, that is, that there is some element
b
h ∈ NGb (hb  r sbi)\Drb,bs . Notice that b    h cannot be loxodromic, otherwise it would normalize the subgroup
 r sbi of order > 2, contradicting Condition (4’) for (G
hb                                                                        b′ , Xb ′ ). Therefore, b     h is elliptic, and since hb    hi
                                            b    b
is a ﬁnite index subgroup of E = hh, rbsbi, this subgroup is also elliptic.
        b lifts, let r, s denote two involutions of G′ such that Dr,s is a lift of Drb,bs , and let g (respectively
     If E
h) be the preimage of rbsb (respectivley b             h) in a preimage E of E.          b Since g maps to an element of N             b′
                                                     ′                                                             ′
in the quotient, we must have g ∈ N . Now, g and rs are elliptic elements of N such that their
images are conjugate in G          b ′ , so by the last consequence of Proposition 4.25 they are conjugate in G′ .
In particular, g is a translation. Let a ∈ G′ be such that r′ = a−1 ra and s′ = a−1 sa and g = r′ s′ .
Recall that by assumption all the preimages of (b                 r , sb) are of p-minimal type, so (r, s) and thus (r′ , s′ )
are of p-minimal type. It follows that h is in Dr ,s′ . Moreover, since both rs and r′ s′ are preimages
                                                                 ′

of rbsb in G′ , then b   a is an element of G     b ′ centralizing the translation rbsb, and by Condition (4) proved
above, b  a belongs to hb     r sbi. In particular, the images of r′ and s′ in G                    b′ are contained in Drb,bs , and
therefore so is b    h, contradicting our initial assumption that b                  h does not belong to Drb,bs .
            NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                                     29


  If Eb does not lift, then by item (7) of Lemma 4.15 there is some vb ∈ vb(Q) such that E         b is
contained in Stab(b  v ), and by Lemma 5.7 the apex vb is the only apex ﬁxed by hb   r sbi. Hence the
normalizer of hb                                                                 b ⊂ Stab(b
               r sbi ﬁxes vb, in particular Drb,bs ﬁxes vb. By Lemma 5.6 we have E          v ) = Drb,bs .
          b
Therefore h belongs to Drb,bs , contradicting our assumption.
     b ′ contains no involution.
(2): N
   This is contained in Proposition 4.25.
                                 b′ )(2) of p-aﬃne type is non-empty and G
(3): the set of pairs (r, s) ∈ I(G                                       b′ acts transitively on it.

     Since G′ contains a subgroup isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ), and since the projection from G′ onto
 b ′
G induces an isomorphism from any elliptic subgroup onto its image, the group G                     b′ contains a
subgroup isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ) as well, and thus the set of pairs of involutions of p-aﬃne type
of G b′ is non-empty.
     Let now (b r, bs) and (b                              b′ )(2) of p-aﬃne type. By Lemma 5.6, any subgroup
                              r′ , sb′ ) be two pairs of I(G
of G b′ isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ) lifts, and thus there are pairs (r, s) and (r′ , s′ ) of I(G′ )(2) of p-aﬃne
type lifting (b               r′ , sb′ ) respectively. Since Condition (3) holds for G′ , there exists g ∈ G such
                 r , sb) and (b
that g rg = r and g −1 sg = s′ . Denoting by b
         −1            ′
                                                               g the image of g in Gb′ , we get bg −1 rbgb = rb′ and
  −1         ′
g sbgb = sb .
b
     Hence G b ′ is almost sharply 2-transitive and we have established Proposition 5.8.                           

   The proof of Condition (2”) in Proposition 5.8 shows that, as it was stated before, the stability
of the family Q′ with respect to Q′ follows from the other conditions of Deﬁnition 5.1. In fact, it
also shows the following result.
Corollary 5.10. If (G′ , X ′ ) belongs to ST ′0 (p), then Q′ is strongly stable.
   We ﬁnish the proof of Proposition 5.3 by showing the remaining statements in the following two
lemmas.
                       b′ ).
Lemma 5.11. O(G′ ) = O(G
Proof. Let g ∈ G′ be an element of ﬁnite order. In particular, g is elliptic. By the second
consequence of Proposition 4.25, the projection G′ ։ G          b ′ induces an isomorphism from hgi onto
 g i, so |g| = |b
hb                          ′
                g| and O(G ) ⊆ O(G    b ).
                                       ′

                        b
    Conversely, if gb ∈ G is of ﬁnite order, then it is elliptic, hence by Lemma 5.6 either there is g ∈ G′
                          ′

such that the projection induces an isomorphism from hgi onto hb                              g| ∈ O(G′ ), or
                                                                          g i, in which case |b
                                               ′
 g i is isomorphic to Cp . However, since G is almost sharply 2-transitive, it contains a translation
hb
of order p, so we obtain O(G    b′ ) ⊆ O(G′ ).                                                             

Lemma 5.12. The images of pairs of distinct involutions of p-affine type (respectively, of p-
minimal type) are again of p-affine type (respectively, of p-minimal type).

Proof. Notice now that for a pair (r, s) ∈ I(G′ )(2) of p-aﬃne type, the projection G′ ։ G                b ′ induces
an isomorphism from NG (Dr,s ) onto its image (since this subgroup is ﬁnite by Remark 2.2), and
                                  ′

thus its image (b    r , sb) will be itself of p-aﬃne type.
    Moreover, suppose that a pair (r, s) of p-minimal type maps in the quotient to a pair (b               r , sb) of p-
                                                          b ′
aﬃne type. By Lemma 5.6, any subgroup of G isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp ) lifts, thus there is a pair
(r′ , s′ ) ∈ I(G′ )(2) of p-aﬃne type lifting (b  r , sb). However, in this case, rs and r′ s′ are elliptic elements
       ′
of N such that their images are conjugate in G             b′ , so they must themselves be conjugate, say by an
element g ∈ G . But then, we would have |Dr,s ∩ g −1 Dr′ ,s′ g| ≥ p, contradicting Lemma 2.7.
                   ′
                                                                                                                      

   This ﬁnishes the proof of Proposition 5.3.
30                              MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


5.2. Stability of the Classes under PP-Quotients. We are ready to prove Proposition 2.15.
Recall that throughout this section, we ﬁx (G, X) ∈ ST ′ (p). By Corollary 5.10 we can apply
Proposition 4.28 and obtain a quotient Ḡ as the limit of iterated applications of Proposition 5.8.
It remains to prove that Ḡ is almost sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p.
   We now state an easy remark that will allow us to lift relations in the partial periodic quotient
Ḡ to relations in some intermediate small cancellation quotient (Gbm , X
                                                                        bm ).

Remark 5.13. Let ḡ (1) , ..., ḡ (a) ∈ Ḡ be such that ḡ (1) ...ḡ (a) = 1. Then, there exist m ∈ N and
              (i)                     (i)                                                     b m of G such
preimages gbm of the elements ḡm (for 1 ≤ i ≤ a) in the small cancellation quotient G
       (1)   (a)
that gbm ...b
            gm = 1.
   Moreover, for all m ∈ N, the small cancellation quotient pair (G  bm , X
                                                                          bm ) is obtained by apply-
ing m times Proposition 5.3, so this pair is in class ST ′0 (p), and the images of pairs of distinct
involutions of p-aﬃne type (respectively, of p-minimal type) will be themselves of p-aﬃne type
(respectively, of p-minimal type). The following lemma shows that this is still true after taking the
limit of the sequence.
Lemma 5.14. The images in the partial periodic quotient Ḡ of pairs of distinct involutions of
p-affine type (respectively, of p-minimal type) will be themselves of p-affine type (respectively, of
p-minimal type). Moreover, the images of pairs of involutions that generate a loxodromic subgroup
will be of p-minimal type.
Proof. Notice ﬁrst that, by construction, all translations of Ḡ will be of order p (by consequence (3)
of Theorem 4.28).
    Let (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) be a pair of p-aﬃne type. Then, by the ﬁrst consequence of Theorem 4.28,
the projection G ։ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from NG (Dr,s ) onto its image (since by Remark 2.2
this subgroup is isomorphic to AGL(1, Fp )), so the pair (r̄, s̄) will be of p-aﬃne type.
    Let (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) be a pair of p-minimal type. Suppose that there is some element ḡ ∈
NḠ (hr̄s̄i)\Dr̄,s̄ . In particular, ḡ conjugates r̄s̄ to (r̄s̄)l for some l ∈ {1, . . . , p − 1}. Therefore, there
is some m ∈ N such that a preimage gbm of ḡ in G         b m conjugates a preimage rbm sbm of r̄s̄ to (b      rm sbm )l .
Clearly gbm cannot be in Drbm ,bsm (since that would yield ḡ ∈ Dr̄,s̄ ). That is, (b              rm , sbm ) is not of
p-minimal type, and this is a contradiction to Proposition 5.3, since this implies that the images
in Gbm of pairs of p-minimal type of G are themselves of p-minimal type.
    Let (r, s) ∈ I(G)(2) be a pair of involutions generating a loxodromic subgroup. Then, there is
some m ∈ N such that Drbm ,bsm ∼      = D∞ and Drbm+1 ,bsm+1 ∼     = Dp . Thus, there must be some b        v ∈ vb(Qm )
such that Drbm+1 ,bsm+1 ⊂ Stab(b       v ). Now, Stab(b  v) ∼ = p D  ,  so D r
                                                                             bm+1 ,b
                                                                                   sm+1    =  Stab(bv ).   Lemma     5.7
readily implies that Drbm+1 ,bsm+1 is of p-minimal type, and then an argument completely analogous
to the one in the previous paragraph yields that the pair (r̄, s̄) is of p-minimal type itself.                       

     We also note the following easy fact.
Lemma 5.15. O(G) = O(Ḡ).
Proof. Let g ∈ G be an element of ﬁnite order. In particular, g is elliptic. By the ﬁrst consequence
of Theorem 4.28, the projection G ։ Ḡ induces an isomorphism from hgi onto hḡi, so |g| = |ḡ| and
O(G) ⊆ O(Ḡ).
    Conversely, let ḡ ∈ Ḡ be an element of ﬁnite order. By Remark 5.13, there is some m ∈ N and
a preimage b gm of ḡ in G bm such that |ḡ| = |b
                                                gm |. Now, by applying Lemma 5.11 m times, we get
|ḡ| ∈ O(G).                                                                                      

     We can now establish the following result.
Proposition 5.16. The partial periodic quotient Ḡ is an almost sharply 2-transitive group of
characteristic p.
            NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                                       31


Proof. We verify the conditions from Deﬁnition 2.4.

(1): every translation is either of order p or of inﬁnite order, and every pair (r̄, s̄) ∈ I(Ḡ)(2) such
that r̄s̄ is of order p is either of p-minimal type or of p-aﬃne type.

   This is an immediate consequence of Lemma 5.14 since every pair of I(G)(2) is either of p-minimal
type, of p-aﬃne type, or generates a loxodromic subgroup.

(3): the set of pairs (r̄, s̄) ∈ I(Ḡ)(2) of p-aﬃne type is non-empty and Ḡ acts transitively on it.

   Since the image of a pair of involutions of p-aﬃne type is of p-aﬃne type, there will be one such
pair in Ḡ.
   Fix now two pairs (r̄, s̄), (r̄′ , s̄′ ) ∈ I(Ḡ)(2) of p-aﬃne type. There is some m ∈ N and preim-
                  ′
ages rbm , b
           sm , rbm , sb′m of r̄, s̄, r̄′ , s̄′ respectively such that rbm sbm and rbm
                                                                                     ′ ′
                                                                                       sbm have order p. Now, by
Lemma 5.14, the pairs (b          rm , sbm ), (b  rm , sbm ) must be of p-aﬃne type (otherwise (r̄, s̄) and (r̄′ , s̄′ )
                                                   ′     ′

would be of p-minimal type), so there must be an element b                   gm conjugating one pair to the other
       bm is in class ST ′0 (p)), and the image ḡ of gbm in Ḡ conjugates (r̄, s̄) to (r̄′ , s̄′ ).
(since G

(4): let r̄s̄ be a translation of the partial periodic quotient Ḡ. Then, Cen(r̄s̄) = hr̄s̄i.

   Assume towards a contradiction that, for a pair (r̄, s̄) ∈ I(Ḡ)(2) , we have an element ḡ ∈
Cen(r̄s̄)\hr̄s̄i. By Remark 5.13, there are m, m′ ∈ N such that some preimages rbm and sbm′ of r̄
and s̄ are involutions in G  bm and Gbm′ respectively. By the second consequence of Proposition 4.25,
this relations will be preserved for all n ≥ m, n′ ≥ m′ . Moreover, there exists l ∈ N such that
a preimage rbl sbl of r̄s̄ commutes with some preimage b  gl of ḡ, and once again this relation will be
preserved for all n′′ ≥ l. Take now m′′ = max({m, m′ , l}). Then, in G    b m′′ we have an element b   gm′′
                                                     gm′′ cannot be in hb
centralizing the translation rbm′′ sbm′′ . Moreover, b                   rm′′ sbm′′ i, since otherwise this
relation would still hold for their images ḡ and r̄s̄ in Ḡ. This contradicts the fact that the pair
 b m′′ , X
(G       bm′′ ) belongs to class ST ′ (p).
                                     0

(2): the subgroup hT r(Ḡ)i contains no involution.

   Suppose towards a contradiction that there are involutions r̄(1) , s̄(1) , ..., r̄(i) , s̄(i) for i ∈ N such
that r̄(1) s̄(1) ...r̄(i) s̄(i) is an involution. By Remark 5.13, there are mj , m′j ∈ N, 1 ≤ j ≤ i such
                                  (j)  (j)           b m′ of r̄(j) and s̄(j) respectively are involutions, and
                                             bmj and G
that some preimages rbmj , sb ′ in G
                                  mj                       j

this will remain the case for all nj ≥ mj , n′j ≥ m′j . Moreover, there is some m′′ ∈ N such that
                    (1) (1)     (i) (i)       bm′′ of r̄(1) s̄(1) ...r̄(i) s̄(i) is an involution, and this will remain
some preimage rbm′′ sbm′′ ...b rm′′ sbm′′ in G
the case for all n ≥ m . Put m = max({m1 , m′1 , ..., mi , m′i , m′′ }), then we get an element in
                     ′′     ′′            ′′′

hT r(Gbm′′′ )i that is an involution, and this is a contradiction to the fact that the pair (G                     bm′′′ )
                                                                                                           bm′′′ , X
is in class ST ′0 (p).                                                                                                 

   Hence, the group Ḡ is almost sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p. Moreover, by construction,
Ḡ has no translation of inﬁnite order, and thus it belongs to the class ST (p). This ﬁnishes the
proof of Proposition 2.15.
   We end this section with the following result, which implies (by Theorem 2.11) that the groups
constructed in Theorem 2.17 do not split.

Lemma 5.17. Ḡ contains non-commuting translations.

Proof. Consequence (4) of Theorem 4.28 implies in particular that N̄ is inﬁnite. Since this subgroup
is generated by translations of Ḡ, and in this group the centralizer of every translation is cyclic of
order p (by Condition (4) of the deﬁnition of class ST (p)) then N̄ must have a pair of translations
that do not commute.                                                                                 
32                           MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


                                    6. Proof of Proposition 2.14
     In this section we prove Proposition 2.14, which we recall for convenience.
Proposition 2.14. Let p be an odd prime number and let G be a group in ST (p).
   (1) Let (r, s), (r′ , s′ ) ∈ I(G)(2) with (r, s) of p-affine type, and (r′ , s′ ) of p-minimal type and
                                   G∗ = hG, t | trt−1 = r′ , tst−1 = s′ i.
    (2) Let H be a non-trivial group without 2-torsion and G∗ = G ∗ H.
Let X denote the corresponding Bass-Serre tree. Then (G∗ , X) belongs to ST ′ (p).
     We ﬁrst observe the following general result.
Lemma 6.1. Let G be a group and let (K, K ′ ) be a quasi-malnormal pair (see Definition 2.6)
of isomorphic subgroups of G. Let α : K → K ′ be an isomorphism, and consider the group
G∗ = hG, t | tkt−1 = α(k)i. Let X be the corresponding Bass-Serre tree. Then stabilizers of paths
with at least three edges in X have order at most two.
Proof. Let v denote the vertex of X ﬁxed by G. Let [v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 ] be a path of length 3 in the tree
X (with d(vi , vi+1 ) = 1). We will prove that the (global) stabilizer of this path has order at most 2.
Since G∗ acts transitively on the (non-oriented) edges of X, we can assume that [v2 , v3 ] = [v, t−1 v]
or [v2 , v3 ] = [t−1 v, v]. Without loss of generality, suppose that [v2 , v3 ] = [v, t−1 v]. The stabilizer of
this edge is G ∩ t−1 Gt = K. Since the vertices v1 and v2 = v are adjacent, there exists an element
g ∈ G such that v1 = gt−1 v or v1 = gtv, thus the stabilizer of the path [v1 , v2 , v3 ] is gKg −1 ∩ K or
gK ′ g −1 ∩ K, hence it has order at most 2 since the pair (K, K ′ ) is quasi-malnormal.                     
Proof of Proposition 2.14. We treat both cases uniformly, so let G ∈ ST (p), and let G∗ denote
either the HNN extension or the free product deﬁned in Proposition 2.14, let X denote the corre-
sponding Bass-Serre tree and deﬁne Q = T r(G∗ ) and N = hT r(G)i. We need to show that G is
almost sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p and satisﬁes the conditions given in Deﬁnition 2.13
for ST ′ (p).
  To see that G∗ is almost sharply 2-transitive of characteristic p, we ﬁrst verify Condition (4’) of
Deﬁnition 2.13 of ST ′ (p) as this condition will be used in the proof of almost sharply 2-transitivity.
(4’): no loxodromic element of G∗ normalizes a non-trivial ﬁnite subgroup of order > 2.
   Let F be a ﬁnite subgroup of G∗ of order > 2. We will prove that NG∗ (F ) is elliptic in the
Bass-Serre tree X. First, note that the ﬁxed-point set Y ⊂ X of F is preserved by NG∗ (F ).
   If G∗ = G ∗ H, then Y is a point, and thus NG∗ (F ) ﬁxes this point as well.
   If G∗ is the HNN extension deﬁned in Proposition 2.14 then, by Lemmas 2.7 and 6.1, the subtree
Y has diameter at most two. If Y is a point, then NG∗ (F ) ﬁxes this point. If Y has diameter one,
then it consists of two vertices joined by an edge e, and NG∗ (F ) ﬁxes the edge e as well. If Y has
diameter two, then NG∗ (F ) ﬁxes the midpoint of this subtree.
     We now show that G∗ is almost sharply 2-transitive as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.4.
(1): every translation is either of order p or of inﬁnite order, and every pair (r, s) ∈ I(G∗ )(2) such
that rs has order p is either of p-aﬃne type or of p-minimal type.
   Let g = rs be a translation, where r, s denote two distinct involutions of G∗ . If r and s have
a common ﬁxed in the tree X, then their product g is contained in a conjugate of G, and thus it
has order p and it is either of p-aﬃne type or of p-minimal type since G belongs to ST (p) (and
by Condition (4’) above, the normalizer of the subgroup it generates is elliptic). If r and s do not
have a common ﬁxed point, then g is loxodromic (and thus it has inﬁnite order).
(2): the subgroup N ∗ = hT r(G∗ )i contains no involution.
  First, suppose that G∗ = G ∗ H, where H has no involution, as in Proposition 2.14. Assume
towards a contradiction that there is an involution in N ∗ , or equivalently, an odd number of
           NON-SPLIT SHARPLY 2-TRANSITIVE GROUPS OF ODD POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC                             33


involutions r1 , . . . , rk of G∗ such that r1 · · · rk = 1. Since H has no involution, every ri is conjugate
to an involution of G. Let π ⋆ : G∗ ։ G denote the map obtained by killing the free factor H. Then
π ⋆ (r1 · · · rk ) = 1, and π ⋆ (r1 · · · rk ) is a product of an odd number of involutions in G, contradicting
the assumption that N has no involution (since G belongs to ST (p)).
    Then, suppose that G∗ is the HNN extension deﬁned in Proposition 2.14. The argument is the
same as in the previous case, but a bit more involved. Assume towards a contradiction that there
is an involution in N ∗ , or equivalently, an odd number of involutions r1 , . . . , rk of G∗ such that
r1 · · · rk = 1. Consider the quotient of G∗ by the normal subgroup generated by the stable letter
                                                                        ∗
t of the HNN extension, that is, the group G′ = G∗ /htiG , and call π ⋆ : G∗ ։ G′ the quotient
                          ′
map. Notice that G can also be obtained as the quotient of G by the relations k = α(k), that is
G′ ∼ = G/hk −1 α(k) : k ∈ KiG . We will identify these isomorphic groups, and call π : G ։ G′ the
quotient map. Note that the kernel of π is contained in N = hT r(G)i. By assumption G belongs
to ST (p), thus N contains no involution. Hence no involution of G is mapped to the identity by π.
Furthermore, the restriction of π ⋆ to G coincides with π, and every involution of G∗ is conjugate
to an involution of G. Therefore, no involution of G∗ is mapped to the identity by π ⋆ . Thus, the
image π ⋆ (r1 ...rk ) is a (trivial) product of an odd number of involutions of G′ . Moreover, every
preimage of π ⋆ (r1 ...rk ) in G will be a product of an odd number of involutions. That is, there is
an involution in N = hT r(G)i, and we arrive at a contradiction.
(3): the set of pairs (r, s) ∈ I(G∗ )(2) of p-aﬃne type is non-empty and G∗ acts transitively on it.
   First, note that this set is non-empty since G is contained in G∗ . Then, if (r, s) ∈ I(G∗ )(2) is of
p-aﬃne type then hr, si is ﬁnite, thus it is elliptic in the tree X. It follows that hr, si is contained
in a conjugate of G, and the conclusion follows from the fact that G belongs to ST (p).
(4): for (r, s) ∈ I(G∗ )(2) , Cen(rs) is cyclic and generated by a translation.
   If rs is elliptic then its centralizer is elliptic in the tree X by Condition (4’) above, and the
conclusion follows from the fact that G belongs to ST (p).
   If rs is loxodromic then it is contained in a (unique) maximal loxodromic subgroup of G∗ ,
which is isomorphic to D∞ (indeed, exactly as in Remark 5.9, since G∗ satisﬁes Condition (1)
and Condition (4’), every loxodromic subgroup of G∗ is isomorphic to Z or C2 × Z or D∞ or
C4 ∗C2 C4 , and D∞ is the only group in this list that contains two distinct involutions), and thus
the centralizer of rs is cyclic inﬁnite, generated by a translation.
   It is left to verify Conditions (1’)–(3’) of Deﬁnition 2.13 of ST ′ (p).
(1’): the action of G∗ on X is acylindrical (and non-elementary).
   If G∗ is the HNN extension deﬁned in Proposition 2.14, then by Lemma 2.7 and Lemma 6.1
stabilizers of paths with at least three edges in X have order at most two. If G∗ = G∗H, stabilizers
of edges are trivial. In both cases, one easily sees that the action of G∗ on X is acylindrical, and
the fact that the action is non-elementary is clear.
(2’): e(N, X) = 1, rinj (Q, X) ≥ 1, ν(N, X) ≤ 5 and A(N, X) = 0.
   Note that since the space X is 0-hyperbolic, it follows from Lemma 3.22 that [g]∞ = [g] for all
g ∈ G∗ , and thus rinj (Q, X) = inf({[g] : g ∈ Q, g loxodromic}). Hence, since X is a simplicial tree,
we immediately get rinj (Q, X) ≥ 1 (in fact, it can be proved that rinj (Q, X) = 2).
   Then, let us prove that ν(N, X) ≤ 5. The parameters of the deﬁnition of an acylindrical action
(see Deﬁnition 3.28) corresponding to ε = 97δ can be taken to be L = 3 and M = 2 in the case
where G∗ is the HNN extension deﬁned in Proposition 2.14 (since stabilizers of paths with at least
three edges in X have order at most two), and L = M = 1 in the case where G∗ = G ∗ H. In both
cases, the bound ν(N, X) ≤ 5 follows readily from Lemma 4.5.
   To see that e(N, X) = 1, by Remark 4.3 it is suﬃcient to prove that every loxodromic subgroup
E of N is cyclic. As in the proof of Condition (4), we have that E is isomorphic to one of the
34                             MARCO AMELIO, SIMON ANDRÉ & KATRIN TENT


following four groups: Z, C2 × Z, D∞ or C4 ∗C2 C4 . But N ∗ has no involution (by Condition (2)),
and thus E is necessarily isomorphic to Z.
   Last, let us prove that A(N, X) = 0. First notice that, since our space X is 0-hyperbolic, the
axis of an element g is the set Ag = {x ∈ X : d(x, g · x) = [g]}. Also, since ν = ν(N, X) is ﬁnite,
we are looking at tuples (g0 , . . . , gν ) of elements with [gi ] = 0 for all i ∈ {0, . . . , ν} (that is, tuples
of elliptic elements) such that they do not generate an elementary subgroup. In this case, Agi is
just the ﬁxed-point set of gi , and A(g0 , . . . , gν ) = diam(Ag0 ∩ · · · ∩ Agν ) is the diameter of the
intersection of their ﬁxed-point sets. If all these elliptic elements have a ﬁxed point in common,
then every element of hg0 , . . . , gν i will also ﬁx this point, and therefore, they would generate an
elementary subgroup. That is, we only need to consider tuples (g0 , . . . , gν ) of elliptic elements such
that Ag0 ∩ · · · ∩ Agν = ∅. Thus, A(g0 , . . . , gν ) = 0, and therefore, A(N, X) = 0.
(3’): translations of inﬁnite order of G∗ are loxodromic for their action on X.
   Let g = rs be a translation, where r, s denote two distinct involutions of G∗ . If r and s have a
common ﬁxed point v ∈ X, then their product g ﬁxes v as well. Hence g is contained in a conjugate
of G (namely the stabilizer of v in G∗ ), and thus it has order p since G belongs to ST (p). If r and
s do not have a common ﬁxed point, then g is loxodromic (and thus it has inﬁnite order).
     This ﬁnishes the proof of Proposition 2.14 and thus of Theorem 1.1.                                       

                                 Appendix A. Proof of Lemma 3.10
   In this appendix we include the proof of Lemma 3.10. For the sake of completeness, we will also
restate this result.
Lemma A.1. Let X be a δ-hyperbolic metric space, x, y ∈ X. Let γ be a (1, ℓ)-quasi-geodesic
connecting x to y for ℓ ≥ 0. Let p ∈ X be a point such that
(1)                                 d(x, p) + d(p, y) ≤ d(x, y) + 2δ + 3ℓ.
Then, d(p, γ) ≤ 4δ + 8ℓ.
Proof. Without loss of generality, we can assume that d(x, p) ≤ d(y, p). If we have d(x, p) ≥ d(x, y),
then we get that d(y, p) ≤ 2δ + 3ℓ and we are done. Similarly, if we assume d(y, p) ≥ d(x, y), then
we get that d(x, p) ≤ 2δ + 3ℓ.
   Now, assume that
                                 max({d(x, p), d(y, p)}) < d(x, y).
Take a point z ∈ γ such that
(2)                                    d(p, y) ≤ d(z, y) ≤ d(p, y) + ℓ.
Since X is δ-hyperbolic, we have that
(3)                                 hx, yip ≥ min{hx, zip , hy, zip } − δ.
Combining Deﬁnition 3.7 with the second inequality of (2) we get
                         1                                          1                     ℓ
(4)      hx, zip − hy, zip =
                           (d(x, p) − d(x, z) − d(y, p) + d(y, z)) ≤ (d(x, p) − d(x, z)) + .
                         2                                          2                     2
Now, inequality (1) and the second inequality of (2) give
(5)                    d(x, p) − 2δ − 3l ≤ d(x, y) − d(y, p) ≤ d(x, y) − d(y, z) + ℓ,
and this together with the triangle inequality imply
(6)                                    d(x, p) − 2δ − 3ℓ ≤ d(x, z) + ℓ.
Therefore, inequalities (4) and (6) yield
                                                                 5
(7)                                       hx, zip − hy, zip ≤ δ + ℓ.
                                                                 2
                                             REFERENCES                                      35


From inequalities (3) and (7) we get
                                                      5
(8)                                hx, yip ≥ hx, zip − ℓ − 2δ.
                                                      2
Inequality (8) together with Deﬁnition 3.7 yield
                           d(y, p) − d(x, y) ≥ d(z, p) − d(x, z) − 5ℓ − 4δ,
and thus
(9)                        d(y, p) − d(x, y) + d(x, z) ≥ d(z, p) − 5ℓ − 4δ.
Also, since z ∈ γ we have that
                                   d(x, z) + d(z, y) ≤ d(x, y) + 3ℓ,
and in consequence,
(10)                              d(x, z) − d(x, y) ≤ −d(z, y) + 3ℓ.
Therefore, combining inequalities (9) and (10) we obtain
(11)                             d(y, p) − d(z, y) ≥ d(z, p) − 8ℓ − 4δ.
The ﬁrst inequality of (2) and inequalitiy (11) imply that d(z, p) ≤ 8ℓ + 4δ.                

                                            References
[AD08]     Goulnara Arzhantseva and Thomas Delzant. “Examples of random groups”. In: preprint
           2011 (2008).
[Adi79]    S. I. Adian. The Burnside problem and identities in groups. Translated from the Russian
           by John Lennox and James Wiegold. English. Vol. 95. Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb. Springer-
           Verlag, Berlin, 1979.
[AG22]     Simon André and Vincent Guirardel. “Finitely generated simple sharply 2-transitive
           groups”. In: (2022). arXiv: 2212.06020 [math.GR].
[ART23]    Agatha Atkarskaya, Eliyahu Rips, and Katrin Tent. The Burnside problem for odd
           exponents. 2023. arXiv: 2303.15997 [math.GR].
[AT23]     Simon André and Katrin Tent. “Simple sharply 2-transitive groups”. In: Trans. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 376.6 (2023), pp. 3965–3993. issn: 0002-9947,1088-6850. doi: 10.1090/tran/8846.
           url: https://doi.org/10.1090/tran/8846.
[BBI22]    Dmitri Burago, Yuri Burago, and Sergei Ivanov. A course in metric geometry. Vol. 33.
           American Mathematical Society, 2022.
[BF02]     Mladen Bestvina and Koji Fujiwara. “Bounded cohomology of subgroups of mapping
           class groups”. In: Geometry & Topology 6.1 (2002), pp. 69–89.
[BH13]     Martin R Bridson and André Haeﬂiger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature. Vol. 319.
           Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[Bow08]    Brian H Bowditch. “Tight geodesics in the curve complex”. In: Inventiones mathematicae
           171.2 (2008), pp. 281–300.
[Bur02]    William Burnside. “On an unsettled question in the theory of discontinuous groups”.
           In: Quart. J. Pure and Appl. Math. 33 (1902), pp. 230–238.
[CDP06]    Michel Coornaert, Thomas Delzant, and Athanase Papadopoulos. Géométrie et théorie
           des groupes: les groupes hyperboliques de Gromov. Vol. 1441. Springer, 2006.
[CLC13]    Serge Cantat, Stéphane Lamy, and Yves de Cornulier. “Normal subgroups in the Cre-
           mona group”. English. In: Acta Math. 210.1 (2013), pp. 31–94. issn: 0001-5962. doi:
           10.1007/s11511-013-0090-1.
[Cou11]    Rémi Coulon. “Asphericity and small cancellation theory for rotation families of groups”.
           In: Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics 5.4 (2011), pp. 729–765.
[Cou14]    Rémi Coulon. “On the geometry of Burnside quotients of torsion free hyperbolic groups”.
           In: International Journal of Algebra and Computation 24.03 (2014), pp. 251–345.
36                                      REFERENCES


[Cou16a] Rémi Coulon. Small cancellation theory: a geometric approach (after F. Dahmani, V.
         Guirardel, D. Osin, and S. Cantat, S. Lamy). French. Paris: Société Mathématique de
         France (SMF), 2016, 1–33, ex. isbn: 978-2-85629-836-7.
[Cou16b] Rémi B Coulon. “Partial periodic quotients of groups acting on a hyperbolic space”. In:
         Annales de l’Institut Fourier. Vol. 66. 5. 2016, pp. 1773–1857.
[Cou21]  Rémi Coulon. Infinite periodic groups of even exponents. 2021. arXiv: 1810.08372 [math.GR].
[DG08]   Thomas Delzant and Misha Gromov. “Mesoscopic curvature and very small cancellation
         theory. (Courbure mésoscopique et théorie de la toute petite simpliﬁcation.)” French.
         In: J. Topol. 1.4 (2008), pp. 804–836. issn: 1753-8416. doi: 10.1112/jtopol/jtn023.
[DGO17] François Dahmani, Vincent Guirardel, and Denis Osin. Hyperbolically embedded sub-
         groups and rotating families in groups acting on hyperbolic spaces. Vol. 245. 1156. Amer-
         ican Mathematical Society, 2017.
[DK18]   Cornelia Druţu and Michael Kapovich. Geometric group theory. Vol. 63. American
         Mathematical Soc., 2018.
[Gro01]  Misha Gromov. Mesoscopic curvature and hyperbolicity. English. Providence, RI: Amer-
         ican Mathematical Society (AMS), 2001, pp. 58–69. isbn: 0-8218-2750-2.
[Iva92]  Sergei V. Ivanov. “On the Burnside problem on periodic groups”. English. In: Bull. Am.
         Math. Soc., New Ser. 27.2 (1992), pp. 257–260. issn: 0273-0979. doi: 10.1090/S0273-0979-1992-00305-1.
[Jor72]  Camille Jordan. “Recherches sur les substitutions”. In: Journal de Mathématiques Pures
         et Appliquées 17 (1872), pp. 351–367.
[Ker74]  William Kerby. On infinite sharply multiply transitive groups. 6. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
         1974.
[Lys96]  I. G. Lysenok. “Inﬁnite Burnside groups of even exponent”. English. In: Izv. Math. 60.3
         (1996), pp. 453–654. issn: 1064-5632. doi: 10.1070/IM1996v060n03ABEH000077.
[NA69]   P. S. Novikov and S. I. Adyan. “On inﬁnite periodic groups. I–III”. English. In: Math.
         USSR, Izv. 2 (1969), pp. 209–236, 241–480, 665–685. issn: 0025-5726. doi: 10.1070/IM1968v002n01ABEH000
[Neu40]  Bernhard Hermann Neumann. “On the commutativity of addition”. In: Journal of the
         London Mathematical Society 1.3 (1940), pp. 203–208.
[Ols89]  A Yu Olshansky. “Geometriya opredelyayushchikh sootnosheniy v gruppakh [Geometry
         of deﬁning relations in groups]”. In: M.: Nauka (1989).
[Osi16]  Denis Osin. “Acylindrically hyperbolic groups”. In: Transactions of the American Math-
         ematical Society 368.2 (2016), pp. 851–888.
[RST17] Eliyahu Rips, Yoav Segev, and Katrin Tent. “A sharply 2-transitive group without
         a non-trivial abelian normal subgroup”. In: J. Eur. Math. Soc.(JEMS) 19.10 (2017),
         pp. 2895–2910.
[RT19]   Eliyahu Rips and Katrin Tent. “Sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic 0”. In:
         Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik (Crelles Journal) 2019.750 (2019),
         pp. 227–238.
[Sel97]  Zlil Sela. “Acylindrical accessibility for groups”. English. In: Invent. Math. 129.3 (1997),
         pp. 527–565. issn: 0020-9910. doi: 10.1007/s002220050172.
[Ten16]  Katrin Tent. “Inﬁnite sharply multiply transitive groups”. In: Jahresbericht der Deutschen
         Mathematiker-Vereinigung 118.2 (2016), pp. 75–85.
[Tit52]  Jacques Tits. “Généralisations des groupes projectifs basées sur leurs propriétés de
         transitivité”. In: Mémoires de la Classe des Sciences 27 (1952).
[Zas35a] Hans Zassenhaus. “Kennzeichnung endlicher linearer Gruppen als Permutationsgrup-
         pen”. In: Abhandlungen aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Universität Hamburg.
         Vol. 11. Springer. 1935, pp. 17–40.
[Zas35b] Hans Zassenhaus. “Über endliche Fastkörper”. In: Abhandlungen aus dem mathematis-
         chen Seminar der Universität Hamburg. Vol. 11. Springer. 1935, pp. 187–220.
                                      REFERENCES   37


Marco Amelio
Universität Münster
Einsteinstraße 62
48149 Münster, Germany.
E-mail address: mamelio@uni-muenster.de

Simon André
Sorbonne Université and Université Paris Cité
CNRS, IMJ-PRG
F-75005 Paris, France.
E-mail address: simon.andre@imj-prg.fr

Katrin Tent
Universität Münster
Einsteinstraße 62
48149 Münster, Germany.
E-mail address: tent@wwu.de
