                                       City Research Online
                                   City St George’s, University of London



 Citation: Boltje, R., Kessar, R. & Linckelmann, M. (2020). On Picard groups of
 blocks of finite groups. Journal of Algebra, 558, pp. 70-101. doi:
 10.1016/j.jalgebra.2019.02.045

 This is the accepted version of the paper.

 This version of the publication may differ from the final published version. To cite
 this item please consult the publisher's version.




 Permanent repository link: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/21526/

 Link to published version: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalgebra.2019.02.045




Copyright and Reuse: Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author(s) and/or
copyright holders. Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study,
educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge, unless otherwise
indicated, provided that the authors, title and full bibliographic details are credited, a
hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata page and the content is not changed
in any way. For full details of reuse please refer to City Research Online policy.

 City Research Online:     http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/   publications@citystgeorges.ac.uk
     ON PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS OF FINITE GROUPS


          ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


         Abstract. We show that the subgroup of the Picard group of a p-block of
         a finite group given by bimodules with endopermutation sources modulo the
         automorphism group of a source algebra is determined locally in terms of the
         fusion system on a defect group. We show that the Picard group of a block over
         a complete discrete valuation ring O of characteristic zero with an algebraic
         closure k of Fp as residue field is a colimit of finite Picard groups of blocks over
         p-adic subrings of O. We apply the results to blocks with an abelian defect
         group and Frobenius inertial quotient, and specialise this further to blocks
         with cyclic or Klein four defect groups.




                                        February 8, 2019

                                       1. Introduction
   Throughout the paper, p is a prime number. Let O be a complete local principal
ideal domain with residue field k of characteristic p. Assume that either O = k or
that O has characteristic zero. By a block of OG for G a finite group we mean a
primitive idempotent b of the center of the group algebra OG, and we call OGb a
block algebra of OG. For B an O-algebra, we denote by Pic(B) the Picard group of
B; that is, Pic(B) is the group of isomorphism classes of (B, B)-bimodules inducing
a Morita equivalence, with group product induced by the tensor product over B. If
B is symmetric (that is, B is free of finite rank as an O-module and B is isomorphic
to its O-dual B ∗ as a (B, B)-bimodule) and if M is a (B, B)-bimodule inducing a
Morita equivalence, then the inverse of its isomorphism class [M ] in Pic(B) is the
class [M ∗ ] of the O-dual M ∗ of M . If G is a finite group, then OG and the block
algebras of OG are symmetric.
   Let G, H be finite groups, and let b, c be blocks of OG, OH, respectively. We say
that a Morita equivalence between OGb and OHc has endopermutation source if it is
given by an (OGb, OHc)-bimodule M which has an endopermutation OR-module as
a source for some vertex R of M , where M is regarded as an O(G × H)-module. By
[28, 7.4, 7.6], a Morita equivalence between OGb and OHc with endopermutation
source induces an isomorphism α : P ∼   = Q between defect groups P and Q of b and
c, respectively, such that the twisted diagonal subgroup ∆α = {(x, α(x)) | x ∈ P }
is a vertex of M . Moreover, α induces an isomorphism between fusion systems of
b and of c on P and Q, respectively (for some suitable choice of maximal Brauer

    1991 Mathematics Subject Classification. 20C20, 20C11.
    This project was initiated while the second and third authors visited the University of Cali-
fornia, Santa Cruz, in Spring 2017. They would like to thank the Department of Mathematics
for its support. Further work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant
No. DMS-1440140 while the authors were in residence at the Mathematical Sciences Research
Institute in Berkeley, California, during the Spring 2018 semester. The third author acknowledges
support from EPSRC grant EP/M02525X/1.
                                                  1
2           ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


pairs). Set B = OGb. By [36, Proposition 9], the Morita equivalences on B with
endopermutation source form a subgroup of Pic(B), which we will denote by E(B).
We denote by L(B) the subgroup of E(B) of Morita equivalences given by bimodules
with linear source, and by T (B) the subgroup of L(B) of Morita equivalences given
by bimodules with trivial source (the fact that these are subgroups follows from
2.6 below). If A is a source algebra of a block with defect group P , we denote by
AutP (A) the group of algebra automorphisms of A which fix the image of P in A
elementwise, and by OutP (A) the quotient of AutP (A) by the subgroup of inner
automorphisms induced by conjugation with elements in (AP )× .
    Let P be a finite p-group and V an endopermutation OP -module having an
indecomposable direct summand with vertex P . By results of Dade [9], the in-
decomposable direct summands of V with vertex P are all isomorphic. For any
subgroup Q of P , denote by VQ an indecomposable direct summand of ResP              Q (V )
with vertex Q. The tensor product of two indecomposable endopermutation OP -
modules with vertex P has an indecomposable direct summand with vertex P ; this
induces an abelian group structure on the set of isomorphism classes of indecompos-
able endopermutation OP -modules. The resulting group is denoted DO (P ), called
the Dade group of P over O.
    Let F be a saturated fusion system on P . We denote by foc(F) the subgroup of
P generated by elements of the form ϕ(x)x−1 , where x ∈ P and ϕ ∈ HomF (hxi, P ).
Slightly modifying the terminology in [21, 3.3] we say that an endopermutation OP -
module V having an indecomposable direct summand with vertex P is F-stable if
for every isomorphism ϕ : Q → R in F between two subgroups Q, R of P we have
VQ ∼ = ϕ VR . (In [21, 3.3] this would be the definition of F-stability for the class of V
in DO (P )). Here ϕ VR is the OQ-module which is equal to VR as an O-module, with
x ∈ Q acting as ϕ(x) on VR . The isomorphism classes of F-stable indecomposable
endopermutation OP -modules with vertex P form a subgroup of DO (P ), denoted
DO (P, F). See [21] for more details. The fusion stable linear characters of P form
a subgroup of DO (P, F) which we identify with the group Hom(P/foc(F), O× ).
We set OutF (P ) = AutF (P )/Inn(P ). Following the notation introduced in [1,
1.13], we denote by Aut(P, F) the group of automorphisms of P which stabilise
F and set Out(P, F) = Aut(P, F)/AutF (P ). The group Aut(P ) acts on DO (P ),
with Inn(P ) acting trivially. This action restricts to an action of Aut(P, F) on the
subgroup DO (P, F) of DO (P ), with AutF (P ) acting trivially on that subgroup,
and hence inducing an action of Out(P, F) on DO (P, F) and its torsion subgroup
  t
DO   (P, F). Again by [28, 7.6], Morita equivalences with an endopermutation source
have sources which are stable with respect to the involved fusion systems. The
assumption that the residue field k is a splitting field for the finite groups in the
statements below implies that the fusion systems of the blocks are saturated.


Theorem 1.1. Let G be a finite group and O be a complete local principal ideal
domain with residue field k of characteristic p such that k is a splitting field for all
subgroups of G. Let b a block of OG with defect group P and source idempotent i
in (OGb)P . Set A = iOGi and B = OGb. Denote by F the fusion system on P
determined by A.

    (i) Let M be a (B, B)-bimodule which induces a Morita equivalence and which
        has an endopermutation module as a source. Then M is isomorphic to a
                            PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                  3


        direct summand of
                                     P ×P
                          OGi ⊗OP Ind∆ϕ   (V ) ⊗OP iOG
        for some ϕ ∈ Aut(P, F), and some F-stable indecomposable endopermuta-
        tion OP -module V , regarded as an O∆ϕ-module via the isomorphism P ∼ =
        ∆ϕ sending x ∈ P to (x, ϕ(x)).
   (ii) The correspondence sending M to the pair (V, ϕ) induces a group homomor-
        phism Φ making the following diagram of groups commutative with exact
        rows:

   1      / OutP (A)       / E(B)        Φ          / DO (P, F) o Out(P, F)
                               O                                 O


   1      / OutP (A)       / L(B)        Φ     / Hom(P/foc(F), O× ) o Out(P, F)
                               O                               O


   1      / OutP (A)       / T (B)       Φ                 / Out(P, F)

         where the upwards arrows are the inclusions.
   (iii) The group E(B) is finite. Moreover, if Φ maps T (B) onto Out(P, F), then
                                           t
         Φ maps E(B) to the finite group DO  (P, F) o Out(P, F).
  This will be proved in Section 3.
Remark 1.2.
(a) By a result of Puig [26, 14.9], the group OutP (A) is canonically isomorphic to
a subgroup of the finite abelian p0 -group Hom(E, k × ), where E ∼
                                                                 = OutF (P ) is the
inertial quotient of b. The right column in the diagram in Theorem 1.1 depends
only on the fusion system F on P , while the column in the middle depends on the
source algebra structure of the block B. This is ultimately the reason for why in
general the map Φ does not necessarily map T (B) onto Out(P, F), not even if B
is nilpotent. See the examples in Section 7.
(b) We have a canonical embedding OutP (A) → Pic(B) given by the correspon-
dence sending α ∈ AutP (A) to the (B, B)-bimodule OGiα ⊗A iOG. As a conse-
quence of a result due independently to Scott [31] and Puig [28], the image of the
group OutP (A) in Pic(B) under this embedding is the subgroup T ∆ (B) of T (B)
given by bimodules which induce a Morita equivalence on Mod(B) and which are
summands of OGi ⊗OP iOG; that is, trivial source bimodules with diagonal vertex
∆P arising in statement (i) with V = O and ϕ = IdP . More generally, an isomor-
phism between source algebras of two blocks of (possibly different) finite groups
induces isomorphisms between the associated diagrams of these blocks in Theorem
1.1 (ii). See for instance [17, 4.1] for a proof of the aforementioned result of Scott
and Puig (which we will use repeatedly).
(c) All groups except possibly DO (P, F) in the above diagram are finite. The image
of E(B) under Φ is not known in general, except in some special cases, including
blocks with cyclic or Klein four defect groups; see the theorems 1.4 and 1.5 below.
(d) Theorem 1.1 applies to O = k. In general, the canonical map E(B) → E(k⊗O B)
is surjective (by [12, Theorem 1.13]), and its kernel is Hom(P/foc(F), O× ).
4           ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


(e) If O = k, then the group Hom(P/foc(F), O× ) is trivial, and hence the second
and third row in the diagram in Theorem 1.1 (ii) are equal in that case. By [19,
Theorem 1.1, Lemma 3.15], if O has characteristic zero and contains a primitive
|G|-th root of unity, then L(B) contains a canonical copy of the abelian p-group
Hom(P/foc(F), O× ), and hence we have a canonical isomorphism
                       L(B) ∼
                            = Hom(P/foc(F), O× ) o T (B)
compatible with the inclusion T (B) → L(B) and Φ. The subgroup of L(B) corre-
sponding to Hom(P/foc(F), O× ) under this isomorphism is equal to the intersec-
tion L(B) ∩ ker(Pic(B) → Pic(k ⊗O B)), and Φ restricts to the identity on this
subgroup. It follows from the constructions in [19, Theorems 1.1, 3.1] that this
subgroup commutes with the image of OutP (A); in other words, L(B) contains a
canonical normal abelian subgroup isomorphic to
                            Hom(P/foc(F), O× ) × OutP (A) .
(f ) If P is abelian, then Out(P, F) = NAut(P ) (E)/E, where E = AutF (P ). We
will use this identification in the statement of the next result.
  Combining results of Puig [27], Zhou [36], Hertweck and Kimmerle [11], and
Carlson and Rouquier [4] yields the following result. Unlike Theorem 1.1, the
remaining results in this section require O to have characteristic zero.
Theorem 1.3. Let G be a finite group. Suppose that char(O) = 0 and that the
residue field k is a splitting field for the subgroups of G. Let b a block of OG with a
nontrivial abelian defect group P . Set B = OGb, let i be a source idempotent in B P ,
and set A = iBi. Denote by E the inertial quotient of B associated with the choice
of i, regarded as a subgroup of Aut(P ), and suppose that E is nontrivial cyclic and
acts freely on P \ {1}. Set NE = NAut(P ) (E)/E. We have Pic(B) = E(B), and
there is an injective group homomorphism Ψ : Pic(B) → Hom(E, k × ) o NE which
makes the following diagram with exact rows commutative:

    1       / OutP (A)                / Pic(B)        Φ    / DO (P, F) o NE

                                           Ψ
                                                                  
    1      / Hom(E, k × )       / Hom(E, k × ) o NE              / NE              /1

where the top row is from Theorem 1.1, the bottom row is the canonical exact
sequence, the left vertical arrow is the canonical embedding, and the right vertical
map is the canonical surjection with kernel DO (P, F).
   If E is trivial, then B is nilpotent; see the Example 7.1 below for details in
that case. Note that the image of Φ need not be contained in the group NE =
NAut(P ) (E)/E since E(B) need not be equal to T (B); see the Example 7.2. Theo-
rem 1.3 will be proved in Section 4.
   For the sake of completeness, we describe the Picard groups for blocks with a
cyclic or Klein four defect group over O with char(O) = 0, since these two cases have
some additional properties. This is for the most part well-known and a combination
of various results in the literature, such as [30], [34], [15, 4.3, 5.6, 5.8], [14, 1.1],
[6, 1.1], [16, §11.4]. In particular, in both of these cases, if B is not nilpotent,
then Pic(B) is equal to T (B), and hence Im(Φ) is contained in NE , where the
notation is as in Theorem 1.3. Furthermore, if P is cyclic, then Aut(P ) is abelian,
                             PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                     5


and hence the semidirect product in the last statement of Theorem 1.3 becomes a
direct product.
Theorem 1.4. Let G be a finite group. Suppose that char(O) = 0 and that the
residue field k is a splitting field for the subgroups of G. Let b be a block of OG with a
nontrivial cyclic defect group P . Set B = OGb, let i be a source idempotent in B P ,
and set A = iBi. Denote by E the associated inertial quotient of B, and suppose
that E is nontrivial. Let M be a (B, B)-bimodule inducing a Morita equivalence.
Then M is a trivial source module. We have
                       Pic(B) = T (B) =   ∼ OutP (A) × Aut(P )/E ,
the group OutP (A) is cyclic of order dividing |E|, with generator the isomorphism
class ΩnB⊗O B op (B), where n is the smallest positive integer such that this bimodule
induces a Morita equivalence.
   The fusion system F on P determined by i in the above theorem is equal to that
of the group P o E. Since the automorphism group of P is abelian, it follows that
Out(P, F) = Aut(P )/E. If O has characteristic zero and if two blocks with cyclic
defect groups are Morita equivalent, then there is a Morita equivalence with en-
dopermutation source, and hence Theorem 1.4 implies that any Morita equivalence
between blocks over O with cyclic defect groups has endopermutation source. We
have similar results for Klein four defect groups.
Theorem 1.5. Let G be a finite group. Suppose that p = 2, that char(O) = 0, and
that the residue field k is a splitting field for the subgroups of G. Let b be a block
of OG with a Klein four defect group P . Set B = OGb, and suppose that B is not
nilpotent. Let M be a (B, B)-bimodule inducing a Morita equivalence. Then M is
a trivial source module. If B is Morita equivalent to OA4 , then
                                Pic(B) = T (B) ∼  = S3 ,
if B is Morita equivalent to the principal block of OA5 , then
                               Pic(B) = T (B) ∼= C2 .
   In Theorem 1.5, since B is not nilpotent, the fusion system F of B on P is that
of the group A4 ∼ = P o C3 , and Out(P, F) ∼   = S3 /C3 ∼
                                                        = C2 . Using the classification
of finite simple groups via [6], it follows that every Morita equivalence between two
non-nilpotent blocks over O with Klein four defect groups has trivial source, and
any Morita equivalence between two nilpotent blocks with Klein four defect groups
has linear source (and there cannot be a Morita equivalence between a nilpotent
and non-nilpotent block with Klein four defect groups). The theorems 1.4 and 1.5
will be proved in Section 4.
   We say that O is a p-adic ring if O has characteristic zero and k is finite, or
equivalently, if O is a finite extension of the ring of p-adic integers. If O is p-adic
and if B is a block algebra of a finite group algebra over O, then Pic(B) is known
to be finite, (see [8, Theorems (55.19), (55.25)]). We give an alternative proof of
this fact as part of Theorem 6.2 below. If k is an algebraic closure of Fp then we
do not know whether Pic(B) is finite, but the following result shows that if O has
characteristic zero, then Pic(B) is the colimit of the Picard groups of blocks over
some p-adic subrings of O; in particular, Pic(B) is a torsion group. In general, the
p-adic subrings of O form a directed system; the colimit of this system is the union
in O of the p-adic subrings.
6          ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


Theorem 1.6. Suppose that k is an algebraic closure of Fp and that char(O) = 0.
Let G be a finite group and b a central idempotent of OG. Set B = OGb.
(i) Let M be a (B, B)-bimodule inducing a Morita equivalence on B. There exists
a p-adic subring O0 of O such that b ∈ O0 G and such that, setting B0 = O0 Gb, we
have M ∼ = O ⊗O0 M0 for some (B0 , B0 )-bimodule M0 inducing a Morita equivalence
on B0 .
(ii) The group Pic(B) is the colimit of the finite groups Pic(O0 Gb), with O0 running
over the p-adic subrings of O such that b ∈ O0 G. In particular, all elements in
Pic(B) have finite order.
   We prove this theorem and related facts in Section 5. It is well known that a
result analogous to Theorem 1.6 holds over k; see Lemma 6.5 below. On the other
hand, unlike the situation in characteristic zero, if k is algebraically closed then it
is known that Picard groups of block algebras over k are not in general finite.
Remark 1.7. Two Morita equivalent blocks of finite groups via a bimodule with
endopermutation source have isomorphic defect groups. It is an open problem at
present whether Morita equivalent blocks always have isomorphic defect groups.
Remark 1.8. Let P be a finite p-group and Q a normal subgroup of P . Suppose
that char(O) = 0. Weiss’ criterion states that if M is a finitely generated OP -
module such that ResP                                              Q
                      Q (M ) is a free OQ-module and such that M is a permutation
OP/Q-module, then M is a permutation OP -module. This was proved by Weiss
in [34, Theorem 2], [35, §6] for O the ring of p-adic integers Zp , extended to finite
extensions of Zp by Roggenkamp in [29, Theorem II], and further extended to O
with perfect residue field in work of Puig [28, Theorem A.1.2], and for general O
in work of McQuarrie, Symonds, and Zalesskii [22, Theorem 1.2]. Weiss’ criterion
is a key ingredient for calculating Picard groups of block algebras of finite groups.
In applications below, we will make use of the fact that Q-fixed points in the
above sitation are isomorphic to cofixed points. More precisely, with the notation
and hypotheses above, one verifies that there is an OP/Q-module isomorphism
O ⊗OQ M ∼                              Q                           Q
           = M Q sending 1⊗m to Tr1 (m), where m ∈ M and Tr1 (m) = y∈Q ym.
                                                                           P

          2. Tensoring bimodules with endopermutation source
   Some calculations of Picard groups will involve stable equivalences of Morita type
and stable Picard groups. We briefly review these notions. Let B, C be symmetric
O-algebras such that B/J(B) and C/J(C) are separable k-algebras. Following
terminology introduced by Broué, we say that a (B, C)-bimodule M induces a stable
equivalence of Morita type between B and C, if M is finitely generated projective
as a left B-module, as a right C-module, and if we have bimodule isomorphisms
M ⊗C M ∗ ∼ = B ⊕ X for some projective B ⊗O B op -module and M ∗ ⊗B M ∼     = C ⊕Y
for some projective C ⊗O C op -module.
   The stable Picard group of B is the group Pic(B) of isomorphism classes in the
stable category of (B, B)-bimodules inducing a stable equivalence of Morita type
on B. The group structure on Pic(B) is induced by taking tensor products over B.
Any Morita equivalence is a stable equivalence of Morita type, and hence if B has
no nonzero projective summand as a B ⊗O B op -module, then we have an inclusion
of groups Pic(B) ⊆ Pic(B).
   Denoting by Ω(B) the kernel of a projective cover of B as a B ⊗O B op -module, it
is well-known that if B has no nonzero projective summand as a B ⊗O B op -module,
                            PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                 7


then Ω(B) induces a stable equivalence of Morita type on B, and the image of Ω(B)
in Pic(B) generates a cyclic central subgroup of Pic(B), which we will denote by
hΩ(B)i. See e. g. [13, Proposition 2.9].
   By [13, Theorem 2.1], if B and C are in addition indecomposable as algebras
and not projective as modules over B ⊗O B op and C ⊗O C op , respectively, and if
M induces a stable equivalence of Morita type between B and C, then M has a
unique indecomposable nonprojective direct summand in any decomposition as a
direct sum of indecomposable B ⊗O C op -modules.
   For P , Q finite groups and ϕ : P → Q a group isomorphism set
                            ∆ϕ = {(x, ϕ(x)) | x ∈ P } .
We write ∆P instead of ∆IdP . We regard an OP -module U as an O∆ϕ-module
with (x, ϕ(x)) acting on U as x, where x ∈ P . That is, the action of ∆ϕ on U is
determined by the action of the first component of an element in ∆ϕ; this accounts
for the slight asymmetry in the statements (i) and (ii) in the next Lemma. If V is an
OQ-module, we denote by ϕ V the OP -module which is equal to V as an O-module,
such that x ∈ P acts as ϕ(x) on V . We use similar notation for right modules and
bimodules. We regard an O(P × Q)-module M as an (OP , OQ)-bimodule via
xmy −1 = (x, y) · m, where x ∈ P , y ∈ Q and m ∈ M .
Lemma 2.1. Let P , Q, R be finite groups. Let ϕ : P → Q and ψ : Q → R be
group isomorphisms. Let V be an OP -module and W an OQ-module.
    (i) We have an (OP , OQ)-bimodule isomorphism
                             P ×Q
                          Ind∆ϕ   (V ) ∼     P ×P
                                       = (Ind∆P   (V ))ϕ−1

        sending (x, y) ⊗ v to (x, ϕ−1 (y)) ⊗ v, for all x ∈ P , y ∈ Q and v ∈ V .
   (ii) We have an (OP , OQ)-bimodule isomorphism
                            P ×Q
                         Ind∆ϕ   (V ) ∼       Q×Q
                                      = ϕ (Ind∆Q (ϕ−1 V ))
         sending (x, y) ⊗ v to (ϕ(x), y) ⊗ v, for all x ∈ P , y ∈ Q and v ∈ V .
   (iii) We have an (OP , OR)-bimodule isomorphism

            IndP ×Q           Q×R     ∼    P ×R
               ∆ϕ (V ) ⊗OQ Ind∆ψ (W ) = Ind∆(ψ◦ϕ) (V ⊗O (ϕ W )) .

Proof. The statements (i) and (ii) are straightforward verifications. Statement (iii)
is a special case of a more general result of Bouc [2, Theorem 1.1]. One can prove
(iii) also by first showing this for P = Q = R, ϕ = ψ = IdP (see e. g. [20, Corollary
2.4.13]), and then using (i), (ii) to obtain the general case.                     

Lemma 2.2. Let P , Q be finite groups and ϕ : P → Q a group isomorphism,
and V a finitely generated O-free OP -module. We have an (OP , OP )-bimodule
isomorphism
                       IndP ×Q (V )∗ ∼
                           ∆ϕ
                                          Q×P
                                     = Ind −1 (ϕ−1 (V ∗ )) .
                                            ∆ϕ

                                                        ×Q    ∗ ∼     P ×Q
Proof. Induction and duality commute, and hence IndP                        ∗
                                                       ∆ϕ (V ) = Ind∆ϕ (V ) as
O(P × Q)-modules. The isomorphism P × Q ∼      = Q × P exchanging the two factors
sends (x, ϕ(x)) ∈ ∆ϕ to (ϕ(x), x) = (ϕ(x), ϕ−1 (ϕ(x))) ∈ ∆ϕ−1 , which accounts for
the subscript ϕ−1 in the last term in the statement of the Lemma.               
8          ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


Lemma 2.3. Let P be a finite group and ζ : P → O× a group homomorphism.
Denote by Oζ the OP -module O with x ∈ P acting by multiplication with ζ(x).
Denote by τ the O-algebra automorphism of OP satisfying τ (x) = ζ −1 (x)x for all
x ∈ P . There is an O(P × P )-module isomorphism
                                IndP ×P     ∼
                                   ∆P (Oζ ) = OP τ

sending (x, y) ⊗ 1 to ζ(y)xy −1 for x, y ∈ P .
Proof. This is a straightforward verification.                                    

   For P , Q finite p-groups, F a fusion system on P and ϕ : P → Q a group
isomorphism, we denote by ϕ F the fusion system on Q induced by F via the
isomorphism ϕ. That is, for R, S subgroups of P , we have Homϕ F (ϕ(R), ϕ(S)) =
ϕ ◦ HomF (R, S) ◦ ϕ−1 , where we use the same notation ϕ, ϕ−1 for their restrictions
to S, ϕ(R), respectively.
Theorem 2.4 ([28, 7.6]). Let G, H be finite groups, b, c blocks of OG, OH with
nontrivial defect groups P , Q, respectively, and let i ∈ (OGb)P and j ∈ (OHc)Q be
source idempotents. Denote by F the fusion system on P of b determined by i, and
denote by G the fusion system on Q determined by j. Let M be an indecomposable
(OGb, OHc)-bimodule with endopermutation source inducing a stable equivalence
of Morita type.
   Then there is an isomorphism ϕ : P → Q and an indecomposable endopermuta-
tion OP -module V such that M is isomorphic to a direct summand of
                                      ×Q
                         OGi ⊗OP IndP
                                    ∆ϕ (V ) ⊗OQ jOH

as an (OGb, OHc)-bimodule. For any such ϕ and V , the following hold.
     (i) ∆ϕ is a vertex of M and V , regarded as an O∆ϕ-module, is a source of
         M.
    (ii) We have ϕ F = G, and the endopermutation OP -module V is F-stable.
   See [20, Theorem 9.11.2] for a proof of the above Theorem using the terminology
of the present paper.
Lemma 2.5 (cf. [24]). Let G be a finite group, b a block of OG, P a defect group
of b, and i ∈ (OGb)P a source idempotent. Denote by F the fusion system on P
of the block b determined by the choice of i. Let ϕ ∈ Aut(P ). The following are
equivalent.
     (i) We have ϕ ∈ AutF (P ).
    (ii) We have iOG ∼ = ϕ (iOG) as (OP , OG)-bimodules.
   (iii) As an O(P × P )-module, iOGi has an indecomposable direct summand
                            ×P
         isomorphic to IndP
                          ∆ϕ (O).

Proof. The equivalence of (i) and (ii) is proved as part of [20, Theorem 8.7.4], and
the equivalence of (i) and (ii) is proved as part of [20, Theorem 8.7.1].          

Lemma 2.6. Let G, H, L be finite groups, b, c, d blocks of OG, OH, OL with
nontrivial defect groups P , Q, R, respectively. Let i, j, l be source idempotents
in (OGb)P , (OHc)Q , (OLd)R , respectively. Let V be an indecomposable endop-
ermutation OP -module with vertex P and W an indecomposable endopermutation
OQ-module with vertex Q. Let ϕ : P → Q and ψ : Q → R be group isomorphisms.
                            PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                  9


  Let M be an indecomposable direct summand of the (OGb, OHc)-bimodule
                                        ×Q
                       X = OGi ⊗OP IndP
                                      ∆ϕ (V ) ⊗OQ jOH

and let N be an indecomposable direct summand of the (OHc, OLd)-bimodule
                      Y = OHj ⊗OQ IndQ×R
                                     ∆ψ (W ) ⊗OR lOL .

Suppose that M induces a stable equivalence of Morita type between OGb and OHc,
and suppose that N induces a stable equivalence of Morita type between OHc and
OLd. Then the indecomposable nonprojective direct summand of the (OGb, OLd)-
bimodule M ⊗OHc N is isomorphic to an indecomposable direct summand with vertex
∆(ψ ◦ ϕ) of the O(G × L)-module
                                      ×R
                         OGi ⊗OP IndP
                                    ∆(ψ◦ϕ) (U ) ⊗OR lOL

where U is an indecomposable direct summand with vertex P of V ⊗O ϕ W .
Proof. Identify P , Q, R via ϕ, ψ; that is, we may assume that ϕ, ψ are the identity
maps. With this identification, the groups ∆ϕ and ∆ψ are both equal to ∆P . It
follows from Theorem 2.4 that the source idempotents i, j, l of b, c, d, respectively,
determine the same fusion system F on P , and that V , W are F-stable.
   Clearly M ⊗OHc N induces a stable equivalence of Morita type, and hence its
unique (up to isomorphism) indecomposable nonprojective summand Z induces a
stable equivalence of Morita type, and moreover, Z is isomorphic to an indecom-
posable summand of
                                    X ⊗OHc Y =
                             ×P                      P ×P
           OGi ⊗OP IndP    ∆P (V ) ⊗OP jOHj ⊗OP Ind∆P (W ) ⊗OP lOL
Since Z is indecomposable, we may replace the term jOHj in the middle by some
indecomposable (OP , OP )-bimodule summand. Since Z must have a vertex of
order at least |P |, it follows from Lemma 2.5 that we may choose that bimodule
                                              ×P
summand of jOHj to be isomorphic to IndP    ∆ (O) for some  ∈ AutF (P ). Thus
Z is isomorphic to a direct summand of
                     ×P           P ×P          P ×P
        OGi ⊗OP IndP
                   ∆P (V ) ⊗OP Ind∆ (O) ⊗OP Ind∆P (W ) ⊗OP lOL

By Lemma 2.1, this is isomorphic to
                                  ×P
                     OGi ⊗OP IndP
                                ∆ (V ⊗O ( W )) ⊗OP lOL

The fusion stability of W implies that this is isomorphic to
                                 P ×P
                      OGi ⊗OP Ind∆   (V ⊗O W ) ⊗OP lOL
By Lemma 2.1 again, this is isomorphic to
                                  ×P
                     OGi ⊗OP IndP
                                ∆P (V ⊗O W )−1 ⊗OP lOL

hence to
                                    ×P
                    OGi ⊗OP IndP   ∆P (V ⊗O W ) ⊗OP  lOL
Now  ∈ AutF (P ), and hence Lemma 2.5 implies that  lOL ∼  = lOL as (OP , OL)-
bimodules. Together it follows that Z is isomorphic to a direct summand of
                                 P ×P
                      OGi ⊗OP Ind∆P   (V ⊗O W ) ⊗OP lOL
Since V , W are indecomposable endopermutation OP -modules, it follows that U
is up to isomorphism the unique indecomposable direct summand with vertex P of
10            ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


V ⊗O W . The fact that Z has a vertex of order |P | implies that Z is isomorphic to
a direct summand of
                                      P ×P
                        OGi ⊗OP Ind∆P      (U ) ⊗OP lOL
as claimed.                                                                      

   The vertex-source pairs of an indecomposable module over a finite group algebra
are unique up to conjugation. For the situation in Theorem 2.4, this translates to
the following statement.
Lemma 2.7. Let G, H be finite groups, b, c blocks of OG, OH with nontrivial de-
fect groups P , Q, respectively, and let i ∈ (OGb)P and j ∈ (OHc)Q be source idem-
potents. Denote by F the fusion system on P of b determined by i, and denote by G
the fusion system on Q determined by j. Let M be an indecomposable (OGb, OHc)-
bimodule inducing a stable equivalence of Morita type. Let ϕ, ψ : P ∼= Q be group
isomorphisms, let V , W be indecomposable endopermutation OP -modules. Suppose
that M is isomorphic to a direct summand of both
                                        ×Q
                       X = OGi ⊗OP IndP
                                      ∆ϕ (V ) ⊗OQ jOH

and
                                     ×Q
                   Y = OGi ⊗OP IndP ∆ψ (W ) ⊗OQ jOH .

Then ϕ−1 ◦ ψ ∈ AutF (P ) and W ∼
                               = V as OP -modules.
Proof. Since OG, OH are symmetric algebras, we have (OGi)∗ =   ∼ iOG as (OP , OG)-
bimodules and (jOH)∗ ∼   = OHj as (OH, OQ)-bimodules. Since the terms in Y are
all finitely generated projective as one-sided modules, duality anticommutes with
tensor products. We therefore have
                   Y∗ ∼            Q×P
                      = OHj ⊗OQ Ind∆ψ−1 (ψ−1 W ∗ ) ⊗OP iOG .
By Theorem 2.4 we have ϕ F = G = ψ F, and the modules V , W are F-stable.
Then W ∗ is clearly F-stable as well. By the assumptions, OGb is a summand
of the (OGb, OGb)-bimodule M ⊗OHc M ∗ . Thus OGb is isomorphic to a direct
summand of the bimodule
                                 X ⊗OHc Y ∗ .
By Lemma 2.1 and Lemma 2.6, it follows that OGb is isomorphic to a direct sum-
mand of
                                   ×P
                   OGi ⊗OP IndP   ∆(ψ −1 ◦ϕ) (U ) ⊗OP iOG
where U is an indecomposable direct summand of
                               V ⊗O (ψ−1 ◦ϕ (W ∗ ))
with vertex P . As an O(G × G)-module, OGb has ∆P as a vertex and a trivial
source (for any vertex), and hence U = O. Thus the O(P × P )-module iOGi, and
hence also the O(P × P )-module
                                     ×P
                       iOGi ⊗OP IndP
                                   ∆(ψ −1 ◦ϕ) (O) ⊗OP iOGi
                                                               P ×P
has an indecomposable direct O(P ×P )-summand isomorphic to Ind∆P   (O). Lemma
2.5 implies that there are α, β ∈ AutF (P ) such that
        IndP ×P   ∼    P ×P          P ×P                  P ×P
           ∆P (O) = Ind∆α (O) ⊗OP Ind∆(ψ −1 ◦ϕ) (O) ⊗OP Ind∆β (O)
                           PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                11


and hence by Lemma 2.1 we have an isomorphism of O(P × P )-modules
                               P ×P
                            Ind∆P   (O) ∼
                                        = IndP ×P
                                             ∆τ (O)

where
                               τ = β ◦ ψ −1 ◦ ϕ ◦ α .
Thus ∆P and ∆τ are both vertices of this O(P × P )-module, hence they are
conjugate in P × P , and this implies that τ is an inner automorphism of P . But
then τ , α, β are all in AutF (P ), and hence so is ψ −1 ◦ ϕ = β −1 ◦ τ ◦ α−1 .
   Finally, the fusion stability of W implies that
                         V ⊗O (ψ−1 ◦ϕ (W ∗ )) ∼
                                              = V ⊗O W ∗
and this module has by the above a trivial summand, forcing W ∼
                                                              = V.                

   Given a block algebra B of a finite group algebra over O, we denote by E(B),
L(B), T (B) the subgroups of Pic(B) of isomorphism classes of bimodules inducing
a stable equivalence of Morita type, having endopermutation, linear, trivial source,
respectively. The canonical group homomorphism Pic(B) → Pic(B) sends the
subgroups E(B), L(B), T (B) to E(B), L(B), T (B), respectively.
Lemma 2.8. Let G, H, be finite groups, B, C block algebras of OG, OH, with
a common nontrivial defect group P . Let i, j, be source idempotents in B P , C P ,
respectively. Suppose that B and C have the same fusion system F on P with
respect to the choice of i and j. Let V be an indecomposable endopermutation OP -
module with vertex P , and let M be an indecomposable (B, C)-bimodule summand
of
                                         ×P
                           OGi ⊗OP IndP ∆P (V ) ⊗OP jOH
such that M induces a Morita equivalence (resp. a stable equivalence of Morita
type) between B and C. The following hold.
     (i) The functor M ∗ ⊗B − ⊗B M induces group isomorphisms Pic(B) = ∼ Pic(C)
                  ∼ E(C) (resp. group isomorphisms Pic(B) =
         and E(B) =                                        ∼ Pic(C) and E(B) =∼
         E(C)).
    (ii) Suppose that V ∼= ΩnP (O) for some integer n. The functor M ∗ ⊗B − ⊗B
         M induces group isomorphisms L(B) ∼   = L(C) and T (B) ∼ = T (C) (resp.
         L(B) ∼
              = L(C) and T (B) ∼ = T (C)).
Proof. Since M and its dual M ∗ induce a Morita equivalence, it follows that the
functor M ∗ ⊗B − ⊗B M induces a group isomorphism Pic(B) ∼   = Pic(C). It follows
from the hypotheses on M and from Lemma 2.6 that this isomorphism preserves
the subgroups determined by Morita equivalences with endopermutation sources,
and hence induces a group isomorphism E(B) ∼  = E(C). If V is a Heller translate
of O, then V is stable under any automorphism of P , and hence by the Lemmas
2.3 and 2.6, the isomorphism E(B) ∼
                                  = E(C) restricts to isomorphisms L(B) ∼= L(C)
           ∼
and T (B) = T (C). The argument for stable equivalences of Morita type is strictly
analogous.                                                                      

Remark 2.9. With the notation of Lemma 2.8, if V is not stable under Aut(P ),
then the functor M ∗ ⊗B − ⊗B M need not induce isomorphisms L(B) ∼= L(C) or
T (B) ∼
      = T (C); see the examples 7.1 and 7.2 below.
12         ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


                           3. Proof of Theorem 1.1
   We use the notation and hypotheses as in the statement of Theorem 1.1. If P =
{1}, then B is a matrix algebra over O. Thus Pic(B) is trivial, hence all groups in
the diagram in (ii) are trivial, and the result is clear in that case. Assume that P
is nontrivial. The fact that M is isomorphic to a summand of
                                     P ×P
                          OGi ⊗OP Ind∆ϕ   (V ) ⊗OP iOG

with V and ϕ as stated in (i) follows from Puig’s result stated as Theorem 2.4
above. This proves (i).
   Lemma 2.7 implies that there is a well-defined map Φ from E(OGb) to DO (F, P )o
Out(P, F) as stated. Lemma 2.6 shows that this map is a group homomorphism.
The kernel of Φ consists of all isomorphism classes of bimodules M such that the
corresponding pair (V, ϕ) satisfies ϕ ∈ AutF (P ) and V ∼ = O. Since ϕ iOG ∼
                                                                           = iOG
as (OP , OG)-bimodule whenever ϕ ∈ AutF (P ), it follows that we may choose ϕ =
IdP . Note that IndP ×P     ∼
                   ∆P (O) = OP as (OP , OP )-bimodules. Thus the isomorphism
classes of bimodules M in the kernel of Φ correspond to trivial source bimodule
summands of
                                  OGi ⊗OP iOG .

As noted in the Remark 1.2 (b), these in turn correspond bijectively to the ele-
ments of OutP (A), via the map AutP (A) → T (B) sending α ∈ AutP (A) to the
isomorphism class of the (B, B)-bimodule OGiα ⊗A iOG. Any bimodule of this
form induces a Morita equivalence on B because OGi induces a Morita equivalence
between B and A. Moreover, A is isomorphic to a direct summand of A ⊗OP A
(cf. [20, Theorem 6.4.7]), hence the previous bimodule is isomorphic to a direct
summand of OGi ⊗OP iOG, where we make use of the fact that α restricts to the
identity on the image of OP in A. This shows the exactness of the first row of the
diagram in the statement. Since by the previous argument, the image of AutP (A)
in E(B) is contained in T (B), the remaining rows of the diagram are exact as well.
This proves (ii).
   For the finiteness of E(B), note first that a (B, B)-bimodule M inducing a Morita
equivalence permutes the projective indecomposable B-modules. Thus for any
primitive idempotent i in B, the B-module M i is projective indecomposable, hence
of O-rank at most that of B. Since the O-rank of B also bounds the cardinality of
a primitive decomposition of 1 in B, it follows that the O-rank of M is bounded
in terms of the O-rank of B. Thus in particular a source of M has an O-rank
bounded in terms of B. Moreover, endopermutation modules over a fixed p-group
over a field of characteristic p are defined over a fixed finite field and lift to the
ring of Witt vectors of that finite field (this is a consequence of the classification
of endopermutation modules; see [33, Theorem 13.2, Theorem 14.2]). This implies
that only finitely many isomorphism classes of indecomposable endopermutation
modules arise as sources of bimodules inducing Morita equivalences of B. Since
there are only finitely many isomorphism classes of indecomposable modules with
a fixed vertex-source pair, the finiteness of E(B) follows. Alternatively, again using
the above mentioned facts on endopermutation modules, one obtains the finiteness
of E(B) as a consequence of the finiteness of Pic(B) whenever O is a p-adic ring
(cf. [8, Theorems (55.19, (55.25)]).
                            PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                13


  Suppose that Φ maps T (B) onto Out(P, F). Let M be an indecomposable direct
summand of
                                   P ×P
                       OGi ⊗OP Ind∆ϕ    (V ) ⊗OP iOG
inducing a Morita equivalence, for some ϕ ∈ Aut(P, F) and some indecomposable
endopermutation O∆ϕ-module V (which is then F-stable, when regarded as an
OP -module, by Theorem 2.4). Since Φ is assumed to map T (B) onto Out(P, F),
there is an indecomposable direct bimodule summand N of
                                      ×P
                         OGi ⊗OP IndP
                                    ∆ϕ (O) ⊗OP iOG

inducing a Morita equivalence. Since Φ is a group homomorphism, it follows that
U = M ⊗B N ∗ is a bimodule inducing a Morita equivalence with vertex ∆P and
source V , regarded as an OP -module. That is, the image of the class of U under
Φ is the class of the pair (V, IdP ), hence contained in the subgroup DO (P, F). In
other words, Φ sends the class of U to the class of V in DO (P, F). By the above,
the group E(B) is finite, and hence the image of V in DO (P, F) has finite order.
This proves (iii), which concludes the proof of Theorem 1.1.

4. Picard groups of blocks with abelian defect and cyclic Frobenius
                          inertial quotient
    In this section we make the blanket assumption that the residue field k is large
enough for the finite groups and their subgroups which arise here. This hypothesis
is in particular needed for the Theorems 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, whose proofs are given at the
end of this section. We need the following result of Puig.
Theorem 4.1 ([27, 6.8]). Let G be a finite group, b a block of OG, and set B =
OGb. Let P be a defect group of b, i ∈ B P a source idempotent of B and e the block
of kCG (P ) satisfying BrP (i)e 6= 0. Suppose that P is nontrivial abelian. Set E =
NG (P, e)/CG (P ) and suppose that E acts freely on P \ {1}. Set L = P o E. Then
there is an indecomposable E-stable endopermutation OP -module V with vertex P
and an indecomposable (B, OL)-bimodule M with the following properties.
                                                         ×P
(i) The bimodule M is a direct summand of OGi ⊗OP IndP ∆P (V ) ⊗OP OL.
(ii) As an O(G × L)-module, M has vertex ∆P and source V .
(ii) The bimodule M and its dual M ∗ induce a stable equivalence of Morita type
between B and OL.
   For a proof of this theorem using the notation and terminology above, see [20,
Theorem 10.5.1]. Note that in the situation of Theorem 4.1, if the acting group E
is abelian, then E is in fact cyclic (cf. [10, Theorem 10.3.1]). The next result we
need is due to Carlson and Rouquier.
Proposition 4.2 ([4, Corollary 3.3]). Let P be a nontrivial abelian p-group and E
an abelian p0 -subgroup of Aut(P ) acting freely on P \ {1}. Set L = P o E. Denote
by Ω the Heller operator on the category of (OL, OL)-bimodules. Any indecom-
posable (OL, OL)-bimodule inducing a stable equivalence of Morita type on OL is
isomorphic to Ωn (M ) for some integer n and some (OL, OL)-bimodule M inducing
a Morita equivalence on OL. Equivalently, we have
                          Pic(OL) = Pic(OL) · hΩ(OL)i ,
where we identify Ω(OL) with its image in Pic(OL).
14         ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


   As mentioned at the beginning of Section 2, the cyclic subgroup hΩ(OL)i is in the
center of Pic(OL). We need to determine the structure of Pic(OL). The following
result is a slight refinement of results of Y. Zhou [36, Theorem 14] and Hertweck
and Kimmerle [11, Theorem 4.6] in the special case where the focal subgroup [P, E]
of P in P o E is equal to P . The proof follows in part that of [15, Lemma 4.2].
As in the aforementioned papers [36], [11], [15], the key step is an application of
Weiss’ criterion.
Proposition 4.3. Let P be a nontrivial abelian p-group and E an abelian p0 -
subgroup of Aut(P ) such that [P, E] = P . Set L = P o E. Denote by F the
fusion system of L on P . Assume that char(O) = 0. Any class in Out(OL) has
a representative in Aut(OL) which stabilises the image of P in OL as a set, and
any (OL, OL)-bimodule which induces a Morita equivalence has trivial source. We
have canonical group isomorphisms
                      Pic(OL) = T (OL)
                              ∼
                              = Out(OL)
                              ∼
                              = OutP (OL) o NAut(P ) (E)/E ,
                    OutP (OL) ∼
                              = Hom(E, k × ) ,
                    Out(P, F) ∼
                              = NAut(P ) (E)/E .
Moreover, the inverse image of NAut(P ) (E)/E in Out(OL) consists of all classes
of automorphisms of OL which stabilise the trivial OL-module.
Proof. Since E is abelian, it follows that the algebra OL is basic, and hence the
canonical map Out(OL) → Pic(OL) is a group isomorphism (cf. [20, 4.9.7]).
Since p0 -roots of unity in k × lift uniquely to roots of unity of the same order
in O× , it follows that the canonical map O× → k × induces a group isomorphism
Hom(E, O× ) → Hom(E, k × ). Any group homomorphism ζ : E → O× yields an
algebra automorphism η of O(P o E) defined by η(uy) = ζ(y)uy for all u ∈ P and
all y ∈ E; in particular, η ∈ AutP (OL). If ζ is nontrivial, then the OL-module η O
is nontrivial, and hence η is not inner. Thus the correspondence ζ → η induces an
injective group homomorphism Hom(E, k × ) → OutP (OL), and by [26, 14.9] this
is an isomorphism. Note that the above arguments show that nontrivial classes in
OutP (OL) do not stabilise the trivial OL-module; we will make use of this fact
later.
   If α is any algebra automorphism of OL, then α O is a module of rank one, hence
corresponds to a group homomorphism ζ : E → O× . Denoting by η the algebra
homomorphism as above, it follows that η −1 ◦ α stabilises the trivial O(P o E)-
module. Thus α = η ◦ (η −1 ◦ α) is a product of an automorphism in AutP (OL) and
an automorphism which stabilises the trivial module.
   It remains to show that the outer automorphism group of OL of automorphisms
which stabilise the trivial module is canonically isomorphic to NAut(P ) (E)/E. If ψ
is an automorphism of P which normalises E, then by elementary group theory, ψ
extends to a group automorphism of P o E, hence to an algebra automorphism β
of OL which stabilises the trivial module. Moreover, β normalises OutP (OL). The
group of outer automorphisms obtained in this way intersects OutP (OL) trivially,
as remarked earlier.
   By a result of Coleman [5] (or by results of Puig on fusion in block source
algebras in [24, Theorem 3.1]), any inner algebra automorphism of O(P o E) which
                           PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                15


stabilises P acts on P as some automorphism in E. Therefore β is inner if and only
if ψ ∈ E, so the above correspondence yields an injective group homomorphism
NAut(P ) (E)/E → Out(OL), and the image of this homomorphism in Out(OL)
normalises OutP (OL) and intersects OutP (OL) trivially.
   We need to show that the image of this group homomorphism consists of all
classes of automorphisms which stabilise the trivial module, and this is done using
Weiss’ criterion (see Remark 1.8 above).
   Since [P, E] = P , it follows that no nontrivial linear character of P extends to
L. Thus every simple kL-module lifts to a unique irreducible character, and the
characters arising as lifts of simple kL-modules are precisely the characters having
P in their kernel. Again since E is abelian, the left kL-module kE (with P acting
trivially) is a direct sum of a set of representatives of the isomorphism classes
of simple kL-modules, and hence the OL-module OE, with P acting trivially, is
the unique lift (up to isomorphism) of kE to an O-free OL-module. Thus the
isomorphism class of OE is stable under any algebra automorphism of OL. Note
that OE ∼  = OL ⊗OP O. Let α ∈ Out(OL). Then the (OP , OP )-bimodule α OL is
free as a right OP -module, and we have isomorphisms α OL ⊗OP O ∼     = α OE ∼= OE.
This is a permutation module as a left OP -module (since P acts in fact trivially on
this module). Weiss’ criterion implies that α OL is a permutation O(P ×P )-module.
As an O(P × L)-module, OL is indecomposable, and hence α OL is indecomposable
as well. Thus α OL is a trivial source O(P × L)-module, with a ‘twisted diagonal’
vertex of the form ∆ϕ for some automorphism ϕ of P . Thus α OL is isomorphic
to a direct summand of Ind∆ϕ    P ×L
                                     (O) ∼
                                         = ϕ OL, where the last isomorphism sends
                   −1
(u, x) ⊗ 1 to ϕ(u)x for u ∈ P and x ∈ L. Comparing ranks yields an isomorphism
       ∼
α OL = ϕ OL as (OP , OL)-bimodules. Any such isomorphism is in particular an
isomorphism of right OL-modules, hence is induced by left multiplication with an
element c in OL× . The fact that this is also a homomorphism of left OP -modules
implies that cα(u) = ϕ(u)c for all u ∈ P . Thus after replacing α by its conjugate
by c, we may assume that α extends ϕ. Let y ∈ E, and denote by cy the inner
automorphism of O(P o E) given by conjugation with y. Then α ◦ cy ◦ α−1 acts
on P as ϕ ◦ cy ◦ ϕ−1 . But α ◦ cy ◦ α−1 = cα(y) acts on P also as the automorphism
given by conjugation with α(y). As before, any inner algebra automorphism of
OL which stabilises P acts on P as some automorphism in E. Thus cα(y) acts
on P as some element in E, or equivalently, ϕ normalises E. It follows from the
above that ϕ extends to a group automorphism of L, which in turn extends to an
algebra automorphism β, whose class is by construction in the image of the map
NAut(P ) (E)/E → Out(P ). Since α and β induce the same action as ϕ, it follows
that β −1 ◦ α ∈ AutP (OL). Therefore, if α stabilises the trivial OL-module, so does
β −1 ◦ α, and hence β −1 ◦ α is inner. Equivalently, α and β have in that case the
same image in Out(OL). The result follows.                                         


  This Proposition shows that the last sequence in Theorem 1.1 applied to B =
O(P o E) as above is a split short exact sequence. The hypothesis [P, E] = P is in
particular satisfied if E is nontrivial and acts freely on P \ {1}.

Corollary 4.4. Let P be a nontrivial abelian p-group and E a nontrivial cyclic p0 -
subgroup of Aut(P ) acting freely on P \{1}. Set L = P oE. Assume that char(O) =
0. Let M be an (OL, OL)-bimodule inducing a stable equivalence of Morita type.
16          ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


Then M has an endotrivial source as an O(L × L)-module. In particular, we have
Pic(OL) = E(OL).

Proof. If M induces a Morita equivalence, then M has a trivial source by Propo-
sition 4.3. Thus the Heller translates of M have as source Heller translates of the
trivial module (for a vertex), and these are endotrivial. The result follows from
Proposition 4.2.                                                                 

Proof of Theorem 1.3. We use the notation of Theorem 1.3, and we set L = P o E.
With the notation of Theorem 4.1, since M induces a stable equivalence of Morita
type, it follows that the functor M ∗ ⊗B − ⊗B M induces a group isomorphism
Pic(B) ∼= Pic(OL). By Corollary 4.4, we have Pic(OL) = E(OL). Lemma 2.8 im-
plies that Pic(B) = E(B); in particular, we have Pic(B) = E(B). The above isomor-
phism Pic(B) ∼ = Pic(OL) restricts to an injective group homomorphism Pic(B) →
Pic(OL). Since Pic(B) = E(B), the group Pic(B) is a finite subgroup of Pic(OL) =
Pic(OL)·hΩ(OL)i, where the last equality uses Proposition 4.2. We show next that
the image of the group homomorphism

                                  Pic(B) → Pic(OL)

induced by M ∗ ⊗B − ⊗B M is contained in Pic(OL), hence induces an injective
group homomorphism Ψ : Pic(B) → Pic(OL) ∼             = Hom(E, k × ) o NE , where the
second isomorphism is from Proposition 4.3.
   If P is not cyclic, then hΩ(OL)i is an infinite cyclic central subgroup of Pic(OL).
Thus any finite subgroup of Pic(OL) is contained in Pic(OL). Therefore, if P is not
cyclic, then the functor M ∗ ⊗B − ⊗B M induces an injective group homomorphism
Pic(B) → Pic(OL).
   If P is cyclic, this is true as well, but requires a slightly different argument since
in that case OL is periodic as a bimodule (see e. g. [15, Lemma 4.1]), and hence
Pic(OL) is already a finite group. If P is cyclic, then the assumption E 6= {1}
implies that |P | ≥ 3. The algebra kL is a symmetric Nakayama algebra, and thus
even powers of the Heller operator on kL permute the isomorphism classes of simple
modules. It follows that every even power of the Heller operator on OL is induced
by a Morita equivalence. Hence, in order to show that the (OL, OL)-bimodule
M ∗ ⊗B N ⊗B M induces a Morita equivalence, we may replace N by any even Heller
translate as a (B, B)-bimodule. Corollary 4.6 below implies we may assume that
N ⊗B − stabilises the isomorphism classes of all finitely generated k ⊗O B-modules.
It follows that the stable equivalence of Morita type given by M ∗ ⊗B N ⊗B M
stabilises the isomorphism classes of all finitely generated kL-modules, hence is a
Morita equivalence by [13, Theorem 2.1].
   Back to the general case, it follows from Remark 1.2 (b) that the canonical
image of OutP (A) in Pic(B) is mapped to a subgroup of Hom(E, k × ) under the
injective group homomorphism Pic(B) → Pic(OL). This shows the commutativity
of the left rectangle in the statement of Theorem 1.3. For the commutativity of
the right rectangle in that diagram, let N be a (B, B)-bimodule inducing a Morita
equivalence on B. Let U be an indecomposable endopermutation OP -module with
vertex P and ϕ ∈ NAut(P ) (E) such that the image of [N ] in DO (P, F) o NE under
the map Φ is equal to [U ][ϕ], where [U ] is the class of U in the Dade group and [ϕ] is
the image of ϕ in NE . The map Ψ sends [N ] to the class of the (OL, OL)-bimodule
                              PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                17


N 0 = M ∗ ⊗B N ⊗B M . By Lemma 2.6 the image of [N 0 ] in DO (P, F) o NE is
                 [V ∗ ] · [U ] · [ϕ] · [V ] = [V ∗ ⊗O U ⊗O ϕ V ] · [ϕ] = [ϕ]
where the last equality uses the fact that Pic(OL) = T (OL) from Proposition 4.3.
This shows the commutativity of the right rectangle in the diagram and concludes
the proof of Theorem 1.3.                                                      

    Let G be a finite group and b a block of kG with a nontrivial cyclic defect group
P and inertial quotient E. We collect some well-known results on cyclic blocks,
going back to Brauer, Dade, and Green. Our notation follows [15] (where proofs
and further references can be found).
    Set B = kGb, and denote by I a set of representatives of the conjugacy classes of
primitive idempotents in B. We have `(B) = |E| = |I|. For any i ∈ I, the projective
indecomposable B-module Bi has uniserial submodules Ui , Vi such that Ui + Vi =
J(B)i and Ui ∩ Vi = soc(Bi). One may choose notation such that Ω(Ui ) ∼    = Vρ(i) for
some ρ(i) ∈ I and Ω(Vi ) ∼ = Uσ(i) for some σ(i) ∈ I. The maps ρ, σ defined in this
way are then permutations of I, and ρ ◦ σ is a transitive cycle on I. The Brauer
tree of B is defined as follows. Each vertex corresponds to exactly one ρ-orbit, or
one σ-orbit. The edges are labelled by the elements in I, in such a way that the
edge i connects the ρ-orbit iρ of i with the σ-orbit iσ of i. The permutations ρ and
σ induce cyclic permutations of the set of edges emanating from a fixed vertex. If
|P | ≥ 3, then the 2|E| modules Ui , Vi , i ∈ I, are pairwise nonisomorphic, because
they correspond to the simple k(P oE)-modules and their Heller translates through
a stable equivalence of Morita type between B and k(P o E). In particular, if |P | ≥
3, then the modules Ui , Vi all have period 2|E|, for any even integer n and any i ∈
I there is j ∈ I such that Ωn (Ui ) ∼= Uj , and for any odd integer n and any i ∈ I
there is j ∈ I such that Ωn (Ui ) ∼
                                  = Vj .
Proposition 4.5. Let G be a finite group and b a block of kG with a cyclic defect
group P of order at least 3. Set B = kGb. Let n be an integer such that the (B, B)-
bimodule M = ΩnB⊗k B op (B) induces a Morita equivalence. Then n is even. As a
k(G × G)-module, M has vertex ∆P = {(u, u) | u ∈ P } and trivial source.
Proof. Since the functor M ⊗B − is an equivalence, it permutes the isomorphism
classes of simple modules in such a way that the induced permutation of the edges
of the Brauer tree is a tree automorphism. By [12, 7.2] this automorphism stabilises
a vertex (this is where we use that |P | ≥ 3). Thus there is a ρ-orbit or a σ-orbit
which is stabilised by this automorphism. Suppose that the ρ-orbit iρ of an edge i is
stabilised. Thus M ⊗B Ui ∼   = Ui0 for some i0 belonging to the ρ-orbit of i. Note that
M ⊗B Ui = Ω (Ui ). By the above, we have Ui0 ∼
           ∼   n
                                                   = Ωm (Ui ) for some even integer m.
Thus Ω  n−m        ∼
             (Ui ) = Ui . Since Ui has period 2|E|, it follows that 2|E| divides n − m;
in particular, n − m is even. Since also m is even, so is n. A similar argument
applies if the Brauer tree automorphism stabilises a σ-orbit. The k(G × G)-module
B has vertex ∆P and trivial source. Since the trivial kP -module k has period 2
and since n is even, it follows that M has vertex ∆P and trivial source.             

Corollary 4.6. Let G be a finite group and b a block of OG with a nontrivial cyclic
defect group P . Set B = OGb. Let N be a (B, B)-bimodule inducing a Morita equiv-
alence. Then there exists an integer n such that the bimodule N 0 = ΩnB⊗O B op (N )
induces a Morita equivalence with the property that the functor N 0 ⊗B − stabilises
18          ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


the isomorphism class of every finitely generated k⊗O B-module. Moreover, if |P | ≥
3, then any integer n with this property is even.
Proof. It follows from [15, 5.1] that there is an integer n such that N 0 = ΩnB⊗O B op (N )
induces a Morita equivalence with the property that the functor N 0 ⊗B − stabilises
the isomorphism class of every finitely generated k ⊗O B-module. Then the bimod-
ule N 0 ⊗B N ∗ ∼= ΩnB⊗O B op (B) induces a Morita equivalence as well. Therefore, if
|P | ≥ 3, then Proposition 4.5 implies that n is even.                                  
Proof of Theorem 1.4. Let G be a finite group and b a block of OG with a nontrivial
cyclic defect group P and nontrivial inertial quotient E. Set B = OGb. Since E
is nontrivial, the block B is not nilpotent, and hence |P | ≥ 3. Let M be a (B, B)-
bimodule inducing a Morita equivalence. Since Pic(B) = E(B), the vertices of M
are twisted diagonal subgroups of P × P isomorphic to P . We need to show that
M has a trivial source, for some vertex. Since the trivial OP -module has period
2, it follows that M has a trivial source if and only ΩnB⊗O B op (M ) has a trivial
source for some (and then necessarily any) even integer n. Therefore, by Corollary
4.6 we may assume that the functor M ⊗B − stabilises the isomorphism classes of
all finitely generated k ⊗O B-modules. By [15, 4.3, 5.6], the subgroup of Pic(B)
of bimodules with this property is canonically isomorphic to Aut(P )/E, and by
[15, 5.8], the bimodules with this property correspond to algebra automorphisms
of A extending group automorphisms of P , and hence these bimodules have trivial
source. By the Remark 1.2, the group OutP (A) corresponds to the subgroup of
Pic(B) of isomorphism classes of bimodules of the form ΩnB⊗O B op (B), where n is
an integer such that this bimodule induces a Morita equivalence. Note that in that
case we have ΩnB⊗O B op (M ) ∼= ΩnB⊗O B op (B) ⊗B M ∼= M ⊗B ΩnB⊗O B op (B). Thus
OutP (A) is indeed a direct factor of Pic(B).                                    
Proof of Theorem 1.5. Let G be a finite group and b a non-nilpotent block of OG
with a Klein four defect group P . Set B = OGb. Every endopermutation OP -
module is a Heller translate of a rank one module. By [14, Theorem 1.1], B
is Morita equivalent to either OA4 or the principal block algebra of OA5 , via a
Morita equivalence with source a Heller translate of the trivial module. (Using the
classification of finite simple groups it is shown in [6] that there is even a Morita
equivalence with trivial source in these cases, but this is not needed for the present
proof). By Lemma 2.8, we may assume that B is equal to one of these two algebras.
Note that then B is its own source algebra.
   If B = OA4 , the result follows from Proposition 4.3; indeed, we have OutP (B) ∼  =
C3 , and Aut(P ) ∼ = S3 , hence Aut(P )/E ∼ = S3 /C3 ∼
                                                     = C2 , which acts nontrivially on
OutP (B) and hence yields Pic(B) ∼   = S3 .
   Suppose that B is the principal block algebra OA5 b0 . As a very special case of
Theorem 4.1, identifying OA4 to its image in this algebra, induction and restriction
yields a splendid stable equivalence of Morita type between B and OA4 (this is well-
known and easy to verify directly). That is, we are in a situation of Lemma 2.8
in which V = O. By Theorem 1.3 we have an embedding Pic(B) → Pic(OA4 ) ∼             =
C3 o C2 which maps OutP (B) to the subgroup C3 .
   We show next that OutP (B) is trivial. Write A4 = P oE with E ∼     = C3 . We need
to show that the nontrivial automorphisms of the form uy 7→ ζ(y)uy of OA4 (with
ζ : E → k × a group homomorphism, u ∈ P , y ∈ E as above) do not extend to B.
Indeed, if they did, then the three trivial source B-modules corresponding (through
                             PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                  19


the stable equivalence between OA4 and B) to the three linear characters of OA4
would have to have the same rank because they would be transitively permuted
by this automorphism group. This is not possible: the trivial character of OA4
corresponds to the trivial character of B, while the two nontrivial characters of OA4
correspond to B-modules of O-rank greater than 1 (because A5 has no nontrivial
character of rank 1). Thus OutP (B) is trivial.
   It follows that Pic(B) embeds into C2 . An automorphism of B given by con-
jugation with an involution in S5 yields a nontrivial element in Pic(B), whence
Pic(B) ∼= C2 .                                                                      

                            5. Proof of Theorem 1.6
   We assume in this Section that O has characteristic zero. For the description
of Pic(B) as colimit of finite groups in Theorem 1.6, we will need the following
lemmas. One of the key ingredients is Brauer’s Lemma 1 from [3], implying that if
K is a field of characteristic 0 containing all p0 -order roots of unity in an algebraic
closure, then the Schur indices over K of absolutely irreducible characters of finite
groups are all equal to 1.
Lemma 5.1. Let K be a field of characteristic 0 containing all roots of unity of
order prime to p in an algebraic closure of K and let K0 be a subfield of K containing
all algebraic elements in K. Let G be a finite group and X a finite-dimensional
KG-module. Then there is a K0 G-module X0 such that X ∼       = K ⊗K0 X0 .
Proof. Since KG is semisimple, we may assume that X is a simple KG-module.
Let K 0 be a splitting field for X containing K. Let Y 0 be a simple K 0 G-module
which is isomorphic to a direct summand of K 0 ⊗K X, and denote by ψ the char-
acter of Y 0 . The field K(ψ) generated by the values ψ(g), g ∈ G, is contained in
K(ζ) for some root of unity of p-power order ζ, since K contains all roots of unity
of order prime to p. The minimal polynomial of ζ over K has algebraic numbers as
coefficients, hence is also the minimal polynomial of ζ over K0 . Thus the restric-
tion of field automorphisms of K(ζ) to K0 (ζ) induces an isomorphism of Galois
groups Gal(K(ζ) : K) ∼   = Gal(K0 (ζ) : K0 ), hence an isomorphism of Galois groups
Gal(K(ψ) : K) ∼  = Gal(K0 (ψ) : K0 ). By [3, Lemma 1], K0 (ψ) is a splitting field for
ψ; that is, Y 0 ∼
                = K 0 ⊗K0 (ψ) Y0 for some simple K0 (ψ)G-module Y0 ; in particular,
Y = K(ψ) ⊗K0 (ψ) Y0 is a simple K(ψ)-module which appears in K(ψ) ⊗K X. It
follows from [23, Ch. 3 Theorem (1.30)] that we have an isomorphism
                           K(ψ) ⊗K X ∼
                                                M
                                                         σ
                                        =                  Y
                                          σ∈Gal(K(ψ):K)

Combining the above isomorphisms yields that the K0 G-module
                                     M
                                               σ
                          X0 =                   Y0
                                    σ∈Gal(K0 (ψ):K0 )

satisfies
                       K(ψ) ⊗K0 X0 ∼
                                   = K(ψ) ⊗K X
and hence K ⊗K0 X0 ∼
                   = X.                                                               
   The following Lemma is well-known; we sketch a proof for convenience. As
before, by a p-adic subring of O we mean a finite extension O0 of the p-adic integers
contained in O. Note that J(O0 ) ⊆ J(O).
20          ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


Lemma 5.2. Suppose that k is an algebraic closure of Fp . Denote by K the field
of fractions of O. Let R be the union of all p-adic subrings of O, and let E be the
field of fractions of R identified to its image in K. Denote by ν : K × → Z the
π-adic valuation, where π ∈ O such that J(O) = πO.
     (1) The field K is the completion of E and O is the completion of R with respect
         to the topology induced by ν.
     (2) The restriction ν|E of ν to E × is a discrete valuation with valuation ring
         R and valuation ideal R ∩ πO.
     (3) The field E is the algebraic closure of Qp in K.
Proof. Let W (k) ⊆ O be the ring of Witt vectors of k in O. By the structure
theory of complete discrete valuation rings, we have O = W (k)[π] for an element
π satisfying a monic polynomial f (x) in W (k)[x] such that J(O) = πO (see [32,
Chapter 2, Theorems 3, 4 and ChapterP1, Propositions 17, 18]). Every element
of W (k) is a limit of some sequence ( 0≤i≤n ζi pi )n≥0 , where ζn ∈ W (k)× is a
p0 -root of unity, for all n ∈ N (see proof of Theorem 3, Chapter 2 of [32]). Since
every p0 -root of unity in W (k) lies in a finite extension of Zp contained in W (k),
it follows that W (k) is the completion of the union of the finite extensions of Zp
contained in W (k). Hence, by an application of Krasner’s lemma, we may assume
that f (x) ∈ A[x], for some finite extension A of Zp contained in W (k) (see [32,
Chapter 2, Exercises 1,2]). Consequently, π lies in a finite extension of A and hence
in R. Since every element of O is a polynomial in π of degree at most the degree
of f and with coefficients in W (k), it follows by the same reasoning as above that
every element of O is a limit of a sequence of elements of R implying (1).
    As shown above, π ∈ R. Thus the restriction of ν to E × has valuation group
Z and ν|E is a discrete valuation. In order to show (2) we need to observe that
R = E ∩ O. The inclusion ⊆ is trivial. For the reverse inclusion, any element
in E ∩ O belongs to the fraction field L of some p-adic subring O0 of O with
nonnegative valuation, hence to the valuation ring of L, and that is precisely O0 .
    If L is a subfield of K containing Qp such that the degree of L/Qp is finite, then
the valuation ring of L is a p-adic subring of O, and hence L is contained in E.
Since E is the union of finite extensions of Qp , all elements in E are algebraic over
Qp , whence statement (3).                                                           
Proposition 5.3. Suppose that k is an algebraic closure of Fp . Denote by K the
field of fractions of O. Let R be the union of all p-adic subrings of O, and let E be
the field of fractions of R identified to its image in K. Let G be a finite group, b a
central idempotent of OG, and set B = OGb. Let M be a (B, B)-bimodule inducing
a Morita equivalence on B. There exist a p-adic subring O0 of O such that b ∈
O0 G and an (O0 Gb, O0 Gb)-bimodule inducing a Morita equivalence on O0 Gb such
that M ∼ = O ⊗O0 M0 .
Proof. Let X = K ⊗O M . So, M is a full O(G × G)-lattice in X. By Lemma 5.2, E
contains all algebraic numbers in K. Since k is an algebraic closure of Fp , it follows
that E contains all p0 -order roots of unity in an algebraic closure of K. Hence by
Lemma 5.1, there exists an E(G × G)-module XE such that X = K ⊗E XE . Let
MR = XE ∩ M . By Lemma 5.2, O is the completion of R and K is the completion
of E. Hence, by [7, Corollary 30.10], we have that M ∼   = O ⊗R MR . Let B be an
                                                       u
R-basis of MR . For u ∈ G × G and x, y ∈ B, let αx,y      denote the coefficient
                                                                          P         of y
when ux is written as an R-linear combination of elements of B. Let b = g∈G βg g,
                             PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                   21


βg ∈ O. Then βg ∈ R for all g ∈ G. Since every finite extension of Zp in O is
contained in a p-adic subring of O, there exists a p-adic subring O0 of O containing
  u
αx,y  and containing βg for all u ∈ G × G, x, y ∈ B and all g ∈ G. Let M0 be
the O0 -submodule of MR generated by B. Then M0 is an (O0 Gb, O0 Gb)-bimodule,
finitely generated and free as O0 -module, satisfying MR ∼  = R ⊗O0 M0 . It follows
that M ∼ = O ⊗O0 M0 . By [12, Lemma 4.4, Prop. 4.5] we have that M0 induces a
Morita equivalence on O0 Gb . The result follows.                                  
Proof of Theorem 1.6. Statement (i) follows from Proposition 5.3. Thus Pic(B) is
the colimit of the groups Pic(O0 Gb) as stated. By [8, Theorems (55.19), (55.25)]
(see also Theorem 6.2 below for an alternative proof) the groups Pic(O0 Gb) are
finite, whence (ii).                                                           

   6. On the finiteness and structure of Picard groups over p-adic
                                  rings
   In this section we provide a proof for the finiteness of Pic(B) for a block alge-
bra B of a group algebra over a p-adic ring. We start out assuming that O has
characteristic zero, and specialize later to the case that O is a p-adic ring. Write
J(O) = πO for some prime element π of O. Let A be an O-algebra which is free of
finite rank as an O-module. We use without further comment some standard facts
relating automorphisms to Picard groups (see [8, §55 A] or [20, 2.8.16] for more
details). If α ∈ Aut(A), then the (A, A)-bimodule Aα induces a Morita equivalence
on mod(A), and we have Aα ∼    = A as (A, A)-bimodules if and only if α is inner. The
map sending α to Aα induces an injective group homomorphism Out(A) → Pic(A).
If A is basic, this is an isomorphism (see e. g. [20, 4.9.7]). In general, if M is an
(A, A)-bimodule inducing a Morita equivalence, then M ∼   = Aα as (A, A)-bimodules
for some α ∈ Aut(A) if and only if M ∼   = A as left A-modules. In particular, if the
functor M ⊗A − stabilises the isomorphism classes of all simple modules, hence of
all finitely generated projective modules, then M ∼  = Aα for some α ∈ Aut(A). It
follows that the image of Out(A) in Pic(A) has finite index because it contains the
subgroup of Pic(A) of Morita equivalences which stabilise the isomorphism classes
of all simple modules.
   Let r be a positive integer. We denote by Autr (A) the set of O-algebra automor-
phisms of A which induce the identity on A/π r A. A trivial verification shows that
Autr (A) is a subgroup of Aut(A). We denote by Outr (A) the image of Autr (A)
in Out(A). The map sending α ∈ Autr (A) to the (A, A)-bimodule Aα induces a
group isomorphism
                       Outr (A) ∼
                                = ker(Pic(A) → Pic(A/π r A)) ;
see e. g. [18, 3.1]. In particular, Out1 (A) is isomorphic to the kernel of the canonical
map Pic(A) → Pic(k ⊗O A), and Outr (A) is a normal subgroup of Out1 (A) for all
r ≥ 1.
   If O is a p-adic ring, G a finite group and B a block algebra of OG, then by
a result of Hertweck and Kimmerle [11, 3.13], the group Outr (B) is trivial, for r
large enough. The proof of [11, 3.13] uses a theorem of Weiss in [35] (restated as
Theorem 3.2 in [11]). As a consequence of Maranda’s theorem [7, (30.14)], this
remains true if O is not necessarily p-adic, but Maranda’s theorem leads to a larger
bound for r. More precisely, the smallest positive integer r for which Outr (B) is
trivial in [11, 3.13] depends only on the ring O, while the lowest bound obtained
22         ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


from Maranda’s theorem, applied to the O(G × G)-modules B and Bα , with α ∈
Outr (B), would be an integer r such that π r O = π|G|2 O. We give an elementary
proof of the fact that Outr (B) is trivial for r large enough which does not require
Weiss’ results and which slightly improves on Maranda’s bound; that is, we obtain
a lower bound for r which depends on O and the size of a defect group of B.
Proposition 6.1. Let G be a finite group, B a block algebra of OG and P a defect
group of B. Let d be the positive integer such that π d O = |P |O. For any integer
r > d the group Outr (B) is trivial.
Proof. It suffices to show this for r = d + 1. Let α ∈ Autr (B). In order to show
that α is inner, we need to show that the (B, B)-bimodule Bα is isomorphic to B.
Equivalently, we need to show that Bα and B are isomorphic as O(G × G)-modules.
By the assumptions on α, we have a bimodule isomorphism Bα /π r Bα ∼    = B/π r B; in
particular, Bα /πBα ∼  = B/πB as k(G × G)-modules. Since p-permutation modules
over k lift uniquely, up to isomorphism, to p-permutation modules over O, it suffices
to show that Bα is a p-permutation O(G × G)-module. Since B is relatively P × P -
projective, it suffices to show that Bα is a permutation O(P × P )-module.
    The hypotheses on α imply that for any x ∈ B we have α(x) =P      x + π|P |cx , for
some cx ∈ B. Identify the defect group P to its image in B. Set v = x∈P α(x)x−1 .
We have
                               α(x)x−1 = 1 + π|P |cx x−1
for all x ∈ P . Thus
                                  v = |P | · 1 + π|P |a
for some a ∈ B. Set u = 1 + πa; this element is clearly invertible in B and satisfies
|P |u = v. We are going to show that uyu−1 = α(y) for all y ∈ P . This is equivalent
to showing that uy = α(y)u, hence to vy = α(y)v. In order to show this, fix y ∈
P . Then
               X                X                       X
         vy =       α(x)x−1 y =     α(yy −1 x)x−1 y =     α(y)α(y −1 x)x−1 y .
              x∈P              x∈P                     x∈P
                                                  −1
If x runs over all elements of P , then so does y x, and therefore this element is
equal to α(y)v as required. This implies that composing α with the inner auto-
morphism given by conjugation with u−1 yields an automorphism β which is the
identity on P and which belongs to the same class as α in Out(B). The fact that
u ∈ 1 + πB implies that β ∈ Aut1 (B). Since the images of α and β in Out(B) are
equal, it follows that Bα ∼
                          = Bβ as (B, B)-bimodules, or equivalently, as O(G × G)-
modules. Since β is the identity on P , it follows that Bβ , and therefore also Bα , is
a permutation O(P × P )-module (isomorphic to B as an O(P × P )-module). The
result follows.                                                                      
   Combining Proposition 6.1 with [18, 3.5] yields a proof of the following result,
including the finiteness of Pic(B) in Part (ii) in the case that O is a p-adic ring.
Theorem 6.2. Let G be a finite group and B a block algebra of OG with a defect
group P . Set B̄ = k ⊗O B. We have a canonical exact sequence of groups
                    1      / Out1 (B)       / Pic(B)         / Pic(B̄)

with the following properties.
(i) The group Out1 (B) has a finite p-power exponent dividing pd , where d is the
positive integer satisfying π d O = |P |O.
                              PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                     23


(ii) If k is finite, then Pic(B) is finite, and Out1 (B) is a finite p-group.
(iii) If k is an algebraic closure of Fp , then every element in Pic(B) has finite order.
   We restate the part of [18, 3.5] required for the proof of Theorem 6.2.
Proposition 6.3 (cf. [18, 3.5]). Let A be an O-algebra which is finitely generated
free as an O-module. Let r be a positive integer. Suppose that the canonical map
Z(A) → Z(A/π r A) is surjective. We have an exact sequence of groups
               1       / Out2r (A)        / Outr (A)       / HH 1 (A/π r A) .

For any integer a ≥ 0, the map Outr (A) → HH 1 (A/π r A) in this sequence sends
the subgroup Outr+a (A) of Outr (A) to π a HH 1 (A/π r A).
   We briefly review the construction of the map from Outr (A) → HH 1 (A/π r A)
in Proposition 6.3. Let α ∈ Autr (A). For all a ∈ A we have α(a) = a + π r τ (a) for
some τ (a) ∈ A. By comparing the expressions α(ab) and α(a)α(b) for any two a,
b ∈ A, one sees that the linear map τ on A induces a derivation τ̄ on A/π r A. (For
the ring k[[t]] instead of O and r = 1, this construction is due to Gerstenhaber; the
derivations which arise in this way are called integrable.) It is shown in [18, 3.5]
that the map α 7→ τ̄ sends inner automorphisms to inner derivations, hence induces
a map Outr (A) → HH 1 (A/π r A). This is shown to be a group homomorphism. By
construction, this map sends Outr+a (A) to π a HH 1 (A/π r A), hence has Out2r (A)
in its kernel. It is further shown in [18, 3.5] that Out2r (A) is indeed equal to that
kernel.
  Block algebras satisfy the hypothesis on the surjectivity of the canonical map
Z(A) → Z(A/π r A). We note the following consequences of Proposition 6.3.
Corollary 6.4. Let A be an O-algebra which is finitely generated free as an O-
module. Let r be a positive integer. Suppose that the canonical map Z(A) →
Z(A/π r A) is surjective. The following hold.
(i) The quotient Outr (A)/Out2r (A) is abelian of exponent dividing pr . If k is finite,
then Outr (A)/Out2r (A) is a finite abelian p-group of exponent dividing pr .
(ii) The quotient Outr (A)/Outr+1 (A) is abelian of exponent dividing p. If k is
finite, then Outr (A)/Outr+1 (A) is a finite elementary abelian p-group.
Proof. The exact sequence in 6.3 implies that the quotient Outr (A)/Out2r (A) is
isomorphic to a subgroup of the additive abelian group HH 1 (A/π r A). This group
is annihilated by π r , hence by pr . If k is finite, then A/π r A is a finite set, and hence
HH 1 (A/π r A) is a finite abelian p-group of exponent dividing pr . This proves (i).
It follows from (i) that the quotient Outr (A)/Outr+1 (A) is abelian of exponent
dividing pr . We need to show that its exponent is at most p. Let α ∈ Autr (A). For
a ∈ A, write α(a) = a + π r τ (a) for some τ (a) ∈ A. An easy induction shows that
for n ≥ 1 we have αn (a) ≡ a + nπ r τ (a) modulo π r+1 A, and thus αp ∈ Autr+1 (A).
The rest of (ii) follows as in (i).                                                        
   One can improve the statement on the exponent in statement (i) of Corollary 6.4
by taking ramification into account; we ignored this in the above proof and simply
argued that if π r annihilates an O-module, then the underlying abelian group has
exponent dividing pr . The following statement is well-known; we include a proof
for convenience.
24          ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


Lemma 6.5. Let k be an algebraic closure of Fp , let A be a finite-dimensional
k-algebra, and let X be a k-basis of A. Then Pic(A) is the colimit of the finite
groups Pic(AF ), with F running over the finite subfields of k which contain the
multiplicative structure constants of X, where AF is the F-algebra spanned by X.
In particular, every element in Pic(A) has finite order.
Proof. We may assume that A is basic, and hence that Out(A) ∼         = Pic(A). Since k
is an algebraic closure of Fp , all elements in k are algebraic, and hence any finite
subset of k generates a finite subfield. In particular, the multiplicative constants
of the basis X generate
                   P        a finite subfield k0 of A. Let α ∈ Aut(A). For any x ∈
X, write α(x) = y∈X λ(x, y)y for some coefficients λ(x, y) in k. By the above,
these coefficients are contained in a finite subfield k1 of k, which we may choose to
contain k0 . Thus α is the extension to A of a k1 -algebra automorphism α1 of the
k1 -subalgebra A1 of A with k1 -basis X, and hence Pic(A) is a colimit as stated.
Since A1 is a finite set, it follows that α1 has finite order, implying that α has finite
order. This completes the proof.                                                       
Proof of Theorem 6.2. Set B̄ = k ⊗O B. As mentioned above, the kernel of the
canonical map Pic(B) → Pic(B̄) is isomorphic to Out1 (B), whence the canonical
exact sequence as stated.
    By 6.4, the group Out1 (B) is filtered by the normal subgroups Outi (B) such that
the quotient of each two consecutive groups has exponent at most p. By Maranda’s
theorem [7, (30.14)] or by Proposition 6.1 above, there exists a positive integer r
such that Outr (B) is trivial, and then Out1 (B) has exponent dividing pr−1 . The
statement on the exponent in (i) follows from Proposition 6.1.
    By 6.4 again, if k is finite, then the quotients of subsequent subgroups in this
filtration are finite elementary abelian p-groups, and hence Out1 (B) is a finite p-
group in that case. If k is finite, then k ⊗O B is a finite set; in particular, its
automorphism group as a k-algebra is finite. Since Out(B̄) is isomorphic to a
subgroup of finite index in Pic(B̄), it follows that Pic(B̄) is finite, and hence so is
Pic(B), proving (ii).
    For statement (iii), assume that k is an algebraic closure of Fp . By (i), every
element in Out1 (B) has finite order, and hence it suffices to show that every element
in Pic(B̄) has finite order. The result follows from Lemma 6.5.                      

                                    7. Examples
Example 7.1. By results of Roggenkamp and Scott [30] (see also Weiss [34], [35]),
we have a canonical group isomorphism
                  Pic(OP ) = L(OP ) ∼
                                    = Hom(P, O× ) o Out(P )
This isomorphism is induced by the map Φ in Theorem 1.1 applied to OP . (The
source algebra A in 1.1 is in that case OP , and OutP (A) is trivial). This isomor-
phism restricts to an isomorphism
                                T (OP ) ∼
                                        = Out(P ) ,
so in particular, the last horizontal map in the diagram in Theorem 1.1 is surjective.
This need not be the case, however, for an arbitrary nilpotent block.
   Let G be a finite group and let b be a nilpotent block of OG with a nontrivial
defect group P . That is, the fusion system F on P determined by any choice of
a maximal B-Brauer pair (P, e) is equal to the trivial fusion system F = FP (P ).
                             PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                25


Note that we have Out(P, F) = Out(P ) in that case. By the structure theory
of nilpotent blocks from Puig [25] there is a Morita equivalence between OP and
the block algebra B = OGb given by a (B, OP )-bimodule M with vertex ∆P and
endopermutation source V . Then the O-dual M ∗ has vertex ∆P and endopermuta-
tion source V ∗ . The map sending an (OP , OP )-bimodule N to M ⊗OP N ⊗OP M ∗
induces an isomorphism
                                Pic(OP ) ∼
                                         = Pic(B)
   Thus the map Φ in Theorem 1.1 applied to the nilpotent block b sends Pic(B)
isomorphically to the subgroup
                        [V ] · (Hom(P, O× ) o Out(P )) · [V ∗ ]
of DO (P )oOut(P ). The source algebra A is in this case isomorphic to EndO (V )⊗O
OP , and OutP (A) is again trivial (because the inertial quotient of B is trivial). It
follows that the elements of Pic(B) correspond under Φ to elements in DO (P ) o
Out(P ) of the form
                     [V ] · [ζ] · [ϕ] · [V ∗ ] = [ζ] · [V ⊗ ϕ (V ∗ )] · [ϕ]
where [V ], [ζ] are the classes in DO (P ) of V and of the rank 1 module determined
by ζ ∈ Hom(P, O× ), respectively, and where [ϕ] is the class of an automorphism ϕ
of P in Out(P ). If V is not stable under ϕ, then the commutator
                                [V ⊗ ϕ (V ∗ )] = [[V ], [ϕ]]
in DO (P )oOut(P ) is not trivial. In that case, the corresponding element of Pic(B)
is given by a bimodule with ∆ϕ as a vertex and a nontrivial, and possibly non-
linear, endopermutation source, so the class of ϕ in Out(P ) is not in the image of
the map T (B) → Out(P ) induced by Φ. This scenario does arise; see the next
example.
Example 7.2. Any Morita equivalence between two O-algebras A, B given by
an (A, B)-bimodule M and a (B, A)-bimodule N can be interpreted as a self
Morita equivalence of the algebra A ⊗O B given by the bimodules (M ⊗O N )τ
and τ (N ⊗O M ), where τ : A ⊗O B → B ⊗O A is the isomorphism satisfying
τ (a ⊗ b) = b ⊗ a. Applied to block algebras of finite groups, one can use this to
construct self Morita equivalences with endopermutation sources which need not
be linear.
   Let G, H be finite groups, b, c blocks of OG, OH, respectively, with a common
defect group P . Set B = OGb and C = OHc. Then B ⊗O C is a block of G × H
with defect group P × P .
   Let M be a (B, C)-bimodule with vertex ∆P and endopermutation source V
inducing a Morita equivalence between B and C. Then M ⊗O C, regarded as a
(B ⊗O C, C ⊗O C)-bimodule, induces a Morita equivalence between B ⊗O C and
C ⊗O C with vertex ∆(P × P ) and source V ⊗O O. Let τ be the automorphism
of C ⊗O C defined by τ (c ⊗ c0 ) = c0 ⊗ c. Then τ restricts to an automorphism of
P × P exchanging the two copies of P , inducing an automorphism of ∆(P × P ) in
the obvious way (and all those restrictions of τ are again denoted by τ ).
   Thus the (C ⊗O C, C ⊗O C)-bimodule T = (C ⊗O C)τ induces a self Morita
equivalence with vertex
                          ∆τ = {((u, v), (v, u)) | u, v ∈ P }
26           ROBERT BOLTJE, RADHA KESSAR, AND MARKUS LINCKELMANN


and trivial source. The (B ⊗O C, B ⊗O C)-bimodule
                         (M ⊗O C) ⊗C⊗O C T ⊗C⊗O C (M ∗ ⊗O C)
induces a self Morita equivalence of B ⊗O C with vertex ∆τ and the ∆τ -module
V ⊗O V ∗ as a source (and this is nontrivial if V is nontrivial, and nonlinear if V is
nonlinear).
   Applied to a nilpotent block B with a source algebra of the form EndO (V )⊗O OP
for some endopermutation OP -module V of rank strictly bigger than 1, the block
C = OP (which is its own source algebra) and a Morita equivalence between B
and C given by a bimodule with vertex ∆P and source V yields a nilpotent block
B ⊗O OP of O(G × P ) with defect group P × P with the property that the class in
Out(P × P ) of the automorphism of P × P exchanging the two copies of P is not
in the image of T (B ⊗O OP ) under the map Φ from Theorem 1.1.

Acknowledgement. The authors would like to thank the referees for their careful
reading and helpful comments.

                                         References
      [1] K. Andersen, B. Oliver, and J. Ventura, Reduced, tame, and exotic fusion systems. Proc.
          London Math. Soc. 105 (2012), 87–152.
      [2] S. Bouc, Bisets as categories and tensor product of induced bimodules. Appl. Categor.
          Struct. 18 (2010), 517–521.
      [3] R. Brauer, Investigations on group characters. Ann. of Math. 42 (1941), 936–958.
      [4] J. F. Carlson and R. Rouquier, Self-equivalences of stable module categories. Math. Z.
          233 (2000), 165–178.
      [5] D. B. Coleman, On the modular group ring of a p-group, Proc. AMS 15 (1964), 511–514.
      [6] D. Craven, C. Eaton, R. Kessar and M. Linckelmann, The structure of blocks with a
          Klein four defect group, Math. Z. 208 (2011), 441–476.
      [7] C. W. Curtis and I. Reiner, Methods of Representation theory Vol. I, John Wiley and
          Sons, New York, London, Sydney (1981).
      [8] C. W. Curtis and I. Reiner, Methods of Representation theory Vol. II, John Wiley and
          Sons, New York, London, Sydney (1987).
      [9] E. C. Dade, Endo-permutation modules over p-groups, I, II, Ann. Math. 107 (1978),
          459–494, 108 (1978), 317–346.
     [10] D. Gorenstein, Finite Groups, Chelsea Publishing Company, New York (1980).
     [11] M. Hertweck and W. Kimmerle, On principal blocks of p-constrained groups. Proc. Lon-
          don Math. Soc. 84 (2002), 179–193.
     [12] R. Kessar and M. Linckelmann, Descent of equivalences and character bijections. In:
          Geometric and Topological Aspects of the Representation Theory of Finite Groups (J.
          F. Carlson et al, eds.), Springer Proceedings in Mathematics and Statistics 242 (2018),
          181 – 212.
     [13] M. Linckelmann, Stable equivalences of Morita type for self-injective algebras and p-
          groups, Math. Z. 223 (1996) 87–100.
     [14] M. Linckelmann, The source algebras of blocks with a Klein four defect group, J. Algebra
          167 (1994), 821–854.
     [15] M. Linckelmann, The isomorphism problem for cyclic blocks and their source algebras,
          Invent. Math. 125, (1996), 265–283.
     [16] M. Linckelmann, On stable equivalences of Morita type, in: S. König and A. Zim-
          mermann, Derived Equivalences for group Rings, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1685,
          Springer Verlag Berlin Heidelberg (1998), 221–232.
     [17] M. Linckelmann, On splendid derived and stable equivalences between blocks of finite
          groups, J. Algebra 242 (2001), 819–843.
     [18] M. Linckelmann, Integrable derivations and stable equivalences of Morita type. Preprint
          (2015), to appear in Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc.
                             PICARD GROUPS OF BLOCKS                                        27


 [19] M. Linckelmann, On automorphisms and focal subgroups of blocks. Preprint (2016).
 [20] M. Linckelmann, The block theory of finite groups I/II. London Math. Soc. Student Texts
      91/92, Cambridge University Press (2018).
 [21] M. Linckelmann and N. Mazza, The Dade group of a fusion system. J. Group Theory
      12 (2009), 55–74.
 [22] J. W. MacQuarrie, P. Symonds, and P. Zalesskii, Infinitely generated pseudocompact
      modules for finite groups and Weiss’ Theorem. arXiv:1803.01740v1 (2018).
 [23] H. Nagao and Y. Tsushima, Representations of Finite Groups, Academic Press, San
      Diego (1989)
 [24] L. Puig, Local fusion in block source algebras, J. Algebra 104 (1986), 358–369.
 [25] L. Puig, Nilpotent blocks and their source algebras, Invent. Math. 93 (1988), 77–116.
 [26] L. Puig, Pointed groups and construction of modules, J. Algebra 116 (1988), 7–129.
 [27] L. Puig, Une correspondance de modules pour les blocs à groupes de défaut abéliens,
      Geom. Dedicata 37 (1991), no. 1, 9–43.
 [28] L. Puig, On the local structure of Morita and Rickard equivalences between Brauer blocks,
      Progress in Math. 178, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel (1999)
 [29] K. W. Roggenkamp, Subgroup rigidity of p-adic group rings (Weiss arguments revisited).
      J. London Math. Soc. 46 (1992), 432–448.
 [30] K. W. Roggenkamp, L. L. Scott, Isomorphisms of p-adic group rings, Annals Math. 126
      (1987), 593–647.
 [31] L. L. Scott, unpublished notes (1990).
 [32] J. P. Serre, Local fields. Graduate Texts in Mathematics 67 (1979).
 [33] J. Thévenaz, Endo-permutation Modules, a Guided Tour, in: Group Representation
      Theory (edts. M. Geck, D. Testerman, J. Thévenaz), EPFL Press, Lausanne (2007),
      115–147.
 [34] A. Weiss, Rigidity of p-adic p-torsion, Ann. Math. 127 (1988), 317–332.
 [35] A. Weiss, Rigidity of π-adic p-torsion, Appendix to: S. K. Sehgal, Units in integral
      group rings. Monographs and Surveys in Pure and Applied Mathematics 96, Longman
      Scientific and technical, Harlow, Essex (1993), 309–329.
 [36] Y. Zhou, Morita equivalences between blocks for p-solvable groups, Proc. Amer. Math.
      Soc. 144 (2005), 3133–3142.

Department of Mathematics, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, U.S.A.
E-mail address: boltje@math.ucsc.edu

Department of Mathematics, City, University of London EC1V 0HB, United Kingdom
E-mail address: radha.kessar.1@city.ac.uk

Department of Mathematics, City, University of London EC1V 0HB, United Kingdom
E-mail address: markus.linckelmann.1@city.ac.uk
