Independence and bases: theme and variations
Peter J. Cameron∗
To Boris Zilber on the occasion of his 75th birthday

Abstract
This paper describes a complex of related ideas, ranging from Urbanik’s v ∗ -algebras, through Deza’s geometric groups and Zilber’s homogeneous geometries, to Sims’ bases for permutation groups and their
use in defining “size” parameters on finite groups, with a brief look at
Cherlin’s relational complexity. It is not a complete survey of any of
these topics, but aims to describe the links between them.

1

Introduction

In the 1980s, there was widespread interest in matroids with a large amount
of symmetry. Michel Deza was studying perfect matroid designs, matroids
in which the cardinality of a flat depends only on its dimension: this class
includes uniform matroids, classical projective and affine spaces, and Steiner
systems. One way to enforce this condition is to assume a large group of
automorphisms: for example, it will hold if the stabiliser of any subset is
transitive on the set of points not dependent on that subset. The tool of
choice for many was the recently-announced Classification of Finite Simple
Groups.
In 1988, I attended a Durham Symposium on model theory and groups
run by the London Mathematical Society. To my amazement, Boris Zilber
spoke at the symposium, giving four lectures on his recent result classifying
such geometries with rank at least seven, by geometric methods not using
CFSG.
∗

School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St
Andrews KY16 9SS, UK

1

Zilber [32] had worked on first-order theories which are categorical in all
cardinalities. We knew from Morley’s theorem that this imposes just two
conditions on the theory: countable and uncountable categoricity. The result of Engeler, Ryll-Nardzewski and Svenonius shows that ℵ0 -categoricity is
equivalent to the existence of a large automorphism group, while categoricity
in higher powers forces structural conditions such as the existence of rank
functions, which led to the development of stability theory. These nicely
combine if both types of categoricity hold. In particular, strictly minimal
countably categorical theories carry geometries of infinite dimension which
have analogues of the properties that Deza was interested in.
Zilber’s achievement in his lectures at the Symposium (described in [34])
was to observe that methods from the infinite case could be applied also
to finite structures. The set of elements independent of a finite subset will
be infinite in the infinite case, but sufficiently large in the finite case that
arguments can be adapted.
Perhaps Zilber’s methods have not been sufficiently integrated into finite
combinatorics; we still have work to do.

2

Definitions

A family B of finite subsets of a set is said to have the exchange property
if, given B1 , B2 ∈ B and y ∈ B2 \ B1 , there exists x ∈ B1 \ B2 such that
(B1 \ {x}) ∪ {y} ∈ B.
Clearly all the sets in such a family have the same cardinality. One
definition of a matroid, in terms of its set of bases, is as a collection of subsets
of a finite set having the exchange property. Matroids form an important class
of structures, describing subsets of vector spaces, edge sets of graphs (where
the bases are spanning forests), transversals to families of sets, and several
others. Areas of mathematics in which matroids occur include algebraic and
tropical geometry and homotopy theory [17].
The set of bases in a vector space V has two properties, which serve as a
foundation for linear algebra:
(a) it has the exchange property;
(b) any map from a basis into V has a unique extension to an endomorphism of V .
It is natural to look for further examples of this phenomenon.
2

Let A be an algebra, in the sense of universal algebra; that is, a set carrying a number of operations of various arities (we interpret 0-ary operations
as constants). Suppose that A is finitely generated, and let B be the set of
minimal (under inclusion) generating sets for A. Then A is an independence
algebra if B has the above two properties. The definition, and the classification of these algebras, are essentially due to Kazimierz Urbanik [28] (who
called them v ∗ -algebras); but his work was not as well known as it deserved
to be, and the concept was later rediscovered in the context of semigroup theory. Section 2 of this paper gives some details about independence algebras
and their classification, and mentions a recent result on them.
Perhaps unaware of the work of Urbanik, semigroup theorists Fountain
and Lewin [16] and Gould [19] realised that earlier structural results of Howie,
Reynolds and Sullivan, and Erdos on the full transformation semigroup and
the semigroup of linear maps on a vector space could be generalised to endomorphism semigroups of independence algebras. I learned of the topic from
John Fountain, and set to work with Csaba Szabó to classify at least the
finite independence algebras.
The endomorphisms of a structure form a monoid, and the automorphisms form its group of units. The class of permutation groups arising as
automorphism groups of independence algebras is part of a more general
class, named “geometric groups” by Michel Deza [9]. These groups, and the
underlying closure systems, were studied by Boris Zilber in the 1980s, in the
course of his important researches on countably categorical and ℵ0 -stable
first-order structures; he called these objects quasi-Urbanik structures, see
[33]. Section 3 of this paper discusses some of their theory.
The concept of a base can be defined for any permutation group, not just
the geometric groups. Permutation group bases do not usually satisfy the
exchange property; those which do, the so-called IBIS groups, introduced by
Dima Fon-Der-Flaass and me [10], form a very interesting class. Bases were
introduced by Charles Sims [26] for use in computation with permutation
groups, but raise various interesting questions; among other uses, they form
part of László Babai’s work on the graph isomorphism problem [6], and are
connected with Cherlin’s notion of relational complexity for studying finite
homogeneous structures [13, 14]. This area is seeing renewed activity at
present, so I will not give a complete survey, but will highlight some open
questions.
The final section draws connections between various “measures” of a finite
group with parameters defined in terms of bases in all actions of the group.
3

There are a number of open problems here.
To conclude this section, I give a couple of essential definitions for permutation group theory. Let G be a permutation group acting on Ω. The action
is transitive if there is no G-invariant subset except for Ω and the empty set
(equivalently, any element of Ω can be mapped to any other by some element
of G); it is primitive if it is transitive and, in addition, there is no G-invariant
partition except for the partition into singletons and the partition with a single part. The stabiliser of an element α ∈ Ω is the subgroup of G consisting
of all elements mapping α to itself. The action is semiregular or free if the
stabiliser of every point is the identity; it is regular if it is transitive and
semiregular.

3

Independence algebras

An independence algebra is a finitely generated algebra with the properties
(a) the minimal generating sets have the exchange property;
(b) any map from a minimal generating set into the algebra extends uniquely
to an endomorphism of the algebra.
The definition makes no explicit mention of the operations of the algebra;
there is some freedom about these, as long as the correct subalgebras and
endomorphisms are obtained. (A minimal generating set is a subset minimal
with respect to being contained in no proper subalgebra). Thus a classification up to isomorphism is not possible. Urbanik classified the algebras up to
clone equivalence, noting that an algebra clone-equivalent to an independence
algebra is an independence algebra. Szabó and I used a slightly weaker, but
arguably more natural, equivalence. We say that two algebras A and B are
SE-equivalent if there is a bijection between them which preserves subalgebras and endomorphisms. It turns out that there is one case only where these
notions differ (one SE-equivalence class of independence algebras splits into
two clone-equivalence classes). For further discussion see [1, 2, 3].
There is another small difference also: Urbanik did not allow constants,
but used constant-valued unary operations instead. We will see that the
presence or absence of constants is crucial to the classification.
First consider the case where A has rank 1. (The rank is the cardinality of
a minimal generating set; the exchange property guarantees its invariance.)
4

If there are no constants, then any singleton subset of A is a generating set,
and any element can be mapped to any other by a unique automorphism.
Thus the automorphism group G of A acts regularly. For any group G,
there is an independence algebra of this form; we take A = G and, for each
g ∈ G, equip A with a unary operation µg given by µg (x) = gx. Then G acts
regularly on A by right multiplication.
Now suppose that there is a set C of constants. Then the bases are the
singletons not contained in C, and any of them can be mapped to any other
by a unique automorphism; so we can identify A \ C with a group G. There
is a unique endomorphism fc mapping the identity element of G to c, for
each c ∈ C. There is a left action of G on C, defined by the rule that the
endomorphism g ◦ fc (composed left-to-right) maps the identity of G to an
element which we take to be g(c). Conversely, given any group G and left
action of G on a set C we obtain an independence algebra on the disjoint
union G∪C: it has a constant γc for each c ∈ C (interpreted as c) and a unary
operation µg for each g ∈ G given by µg (h) = gh for h ∈ G, µg (c) = g(c).
The statement “an independence algebra of rank 1” seems to me a remarkably concise way of defining a group with an action on a set.
This construction extends as follows. For any set X, and any group G
with a left action on C, define an algebra on the set A = (X × G) ∪ C with
C as set of constants, and unary operations µg defined by
µg ((x, h)) = (x, gh),

µg (c) = g(c).

This is an independence algebra whose subalgebras are all the sets (Y ×
G) ∪ C for Y ⊆ X, so that the subalgebra lattice is the Boolean algebra
B(X) of subsets of X. Every finitely generated independence algebra whose
subalgebra lattice is a Boolean algebra is of this form; these are the trivial
independence algebras. (We could follow the model theorists and call them
disintegrated.)
Next, it is shown that the subalgebra lattice of a nontrivial independence
algebra is a projective or affine space, depending on whether the algebra has
constants or not. The arguments for this are quite general, not assuming
finiteness or even finite rank; an accessible account is in [12].
Finally it is shown that the algebras are of three types:
(a) Let V be a vector space over a division ring F . Then there is an
independence algebra whose elements are those of V ; the operations
are addition in V and scalar multiplication by elements of F . The
5

subalgebras are the subspaces of V , and so the subalgebra lattice is the
projective space built on V . If W is a subspace of V , we obtain an
independence algebra by taking the elements of W to be constants; its
subalgebra lattice is the projective space on V /W .
(b) Let V be a vector space over a division ring F . For each c ∈ F with
c 6= 0, 1, define a binary operation βc (x, y) = cx + (1 − c)y. (If |F | = 2,
we use instead the ternary operation τ (x, y, z) = x+y+z.) This defines
an independence algebra whose subalgebras are the affine subspaces. If
W is a subspace of V , we can add unary operations for translations by
elements of W to obtain an algebra whose subalgebras are the unions
of cosets of W corresponding to affine subspaces of V /W .
(c) Let G be a sharply 2-transitive group on Ω: this means that any pair
of distinct elements of Ω can be mapped to any other such pair by a
unique element of G. Let {Oi : i ∈ I} be the set of orbits of G on triples
of distinct elements of Ω. For each i ∈ I, define a binary operation µi
by
µi (a, a) = a,
µi (a, b) = c if (a, b, c) ∈ Oi .
This defines an independence algebra; its endomorphisms are the elements of G together with the constant functions, and its rank is 2.
The sharply 2-transitive groups have been of interest for a long time,
partly because of their connections with projective planes. It was known
to Burnside and Frobenius, and probably earlier, that a finite sharply 2transitive group has a regular normal subgroup, and so is the group of 1dimensional affine maps over a finite nearfield (this is a structure satisfying
the field axioms except possibly the commutativity of multiplication and
one distributive law). The finite nearfields were all determined by Zassenhaus [31]: there are infinitely many Dickson nearfields (obtained from Galois
fields by “twisting” the multiplication) and seven exceptional nearfields.
For a long time it was not known whether all sharply 2-transitive groups
are given by nearfields. Several authors [20, 21, 27, 30] defined algebraic
structures from such groups, which were given various names and satisfied
slightly different sets of axioms. Eventually the question was resolved by Rips
and coauthors [24]: infinite sharply 2-transitive groups do not necessarily
have regular normal subgroups, and so cannot all be defined from nearfields.
The most recent appearance of independence algebras is in the paper [1].
This gives more details about the relation between Urbanik’s v ∗ -algebras
6

and independence algebras, the relation between clone equivalence and SEequivalence, and the classification theorem, and goes on to develop matrix
theory for most types of independence algebras, though in the case of sharply
2-transitive groups this works only for those defined over nearfields.

4

Geometric groups

The automorphism group of an independence algebra has some remarkable
properties:
(a) it acts transitively on (ordered) bases for the algebra;
(b) the stabiliser of any tuple of points fixes pointwise the subalgebra they
generate and acts transitively on the points outside this subalgebra.
Forgetting the algebra, the problem of determining the groups with properties like these arises in a couple of places:
• The automorphism group of a strictly minimal set in a totally categorical first-order structure has this property, where the role of subalgebras
is taken by definably closed sets; as we saw, Boris Zilber was motivated
by this.
• Michel Deza defined an analogue of a matroid in the semilattice of
partial permutations rather than the lattice of subsets; he called it a
permutation geometry (by analogy with the term “combinatorial geometry”, an alternative name for a matroid, proposed by Gian-Carlo
Rota).
I will not describe the motivation further, but go straight to the definiition. These groups were called “geometric groups” by Deza; not an ideal
name, since there are many ways in which a group can be “geometric”, and
there is no connection with the topic of geometric group theory, but I will
stick to this term.
A geometric group, then, is a permutation group in which the stabiliser
of any finite tuple acts transitively on the points it does not fix (if any).
We see immediately that, in a geometric group, the analogue of a basis for
independence algebras can be defined as a sequence of points (x1 , x2 , . . . , xr )
in which each point is moved by the stabiliser of its predecessors, but the stabiliser of the whole sequence is the identity. Then the group acts transitively
on ordered bases. The number r is the rank of the geometric group.
7

What are the geometric groups? It is clear that a geometric group of
rank 1 is an arbitrary group acting regularly, perhaps with some added fixed
points. So we can assume that the rank is at least 2.
As noted above, Zilber [32] determined all geometric groups of rank at
least 7; they are stabilisers of sequences of points in the symmetric group,
the general linear group, or the affine group (the last two over a finite field).
His proof used elementary arguments inspired by model theory. To elaborate
a little, in [32] he analysed the structure of countably categorical ℵ0 -stable
structures via their strongly minimal sets, showing as a result that totally
categorical structures could not be finitely axiomatised. Strictly minimal
sets in these structures involve locally finite geometries which are shown to
be either disintegrated (all subsets of a set) or projective or affine spaces
over finite fields; it is this result which he was able to “finitise”, giving the
characterisation noted at the start of this paragraph.
At about the same time, Maund [22] used the recently-announced Classification of Finite Simple Groups to determine all geometric groups of rank
at least 2. The bulk of the work is involved in determining those groups of
rank 2, since they occur as building blocks for the groups of larger rank. The
list is as follows:
(a) H o S2 , where H acts regularly.
(b) M · S3 ≤ H o S3 , where H is abelian and regular and
M = {(h1 , h2 , h3 ) ∈ H 3 : h1 h2 h3 = 1}.
(c) Sharply 2-transitive groups.
(d) V 2 · AGL(1, q) or V 2 · GL(2, q), where V is a vector space over GF(q).
(e) C(q−1)/2 × PSL(2, q) with q ≡ 3 (mod 4).
(f) Cq−1 × Sz(q), where q is an odd power of 2.
(g) PGL(3, 2) and PGL(3, 3).
(In case (d), we regard V 2 as V ⊗ W , where dim(W ) = 2, and GL(2, q) or
its subgroup AGL(1, q) acts on W .)
Maund used this list and some geometry to determine all finite geometric
groups of rank at least 2. Unfortunately this work has never been published.
This list was used by Cameron and Szabó [12] to give a determination
of finite independence algebras. For each geometric group we have to decide
whether or not it is possible to define maps to play the role of endomorphisms,
and operations preserved by the group to make the domain into an algebra.
8

5

Bases for permutation groups

The concept of a base for a permutation group arose in computational group
theory. A base is a sequence of points in the permutation domain whose
pointwise stabiliser is the identity. Thus, for geometric groups, bases in the
sense previously defined are bases here also.
The importance of a base is that two elements of a permutation group
G which agree on a base for G must coincide; for if g and h are the two
elements, then gh−1 fixes the base pointwise, so gh−1 = 1. This can lead to
a compact representation of group elements if the base size is small. So it is
of interest to find a small base for a permutation group. Let bm (G) be the
size of a smallest base for G.
We can find a base very simply, by choosing points and stabilising them
until we reach the identity. This is potentially rather wasteful. Though it is
hard to find the base of smallest size for a given group, there are two simple
methods which perform rather well, involving choosing base points in order:
• There is no need to include a point which is fixed by the stabiliser of the
points already chosen. We call a base irredundant if no point is fixed
by the stabiliser of its predecessors. We note that bases of geometric
groups in the earlier sense are by definition irredundant.
• Motivated by this, a good heuristic is to choose each new base point
from an orbit of largest size of the stabiliser of its predecessors. This is
a “greedy algorithm”, and a base produced by this algorithm is called
a greedy base. The heuristic is based on the idea that to descend a
chain of subgroups to the identity, we should choose the subgroup of
largest possible index in its predecessor at each stage, and the index of
the stabiliser of a point is the size of the orbit of that point.
Note that bases are ordered sequences, and there is no guarantee that reordering an irredundant or greedy base will result in another with the same
property.
Clearly, for a geometric group, irredundant bases and greedy bases are
the same, and they have a beautiful geometric structure: they are the bases
of a matroid. However, the last condition holds more generally, according to
this remarkable theorem of Cameron and Fon-Der-Flaass [10].
Theorem 1 For a permutation group G, the following conditions are equivalent:
9

(a) all irredundant bases have the same size;
(b) the result of reordering an irredundant base is still irredundant;
(c) the irredundant bases are the bases of a matroid.
Proof Clearly (c) implies (a). Also (a) implies (b), since if reordering a base
created a redundancy then a smaller irredundant base could be obtained by
removing some elements. Suppose that (b) holds, and let (a1 , . . . , ar ) and
(b1 , . . . , bs ) be irredundant bases. The stabiliser of a1 , . . . , ar−1 cannot fix
all of b1 , . . . , bs ; suppose that it moves bi . Then (a1 , . . . , ar−1 , bi , ar ) is a
base, which must be redundant since swapping the last two elements gives
an irredundant base. But the only possible redundancy is that ar is fixed by
the stabiliser of the earlier points, so (a1 , . . . , ar−1 , bi ) is an irredundant base.
Thus the exchange property holds.
2
Groups satisfying these conclusions are called IBIS groups (an acronym
for “Irredundant Bases of Invariant Size”. Every geometric group is an IBIS
group; the converse is far from true. For a simple example, a Frobenius group
(a transitive group in which the stabiliser of any two points is trivial but the
stabiliser of a single point is not) is an IBIS group of rank 2: the bases are
all the 2-element sets. A Frobenius group is a geometric group if and only if
it is sharply 2-transitive, and as we saw, all sharply 2-transitive groups are
automorphism groups of independence algebras.
A large class of (intransitive) examples is given by the following construction.
Let C be a linear code of length n over the finite field F (a subspace of
n
F ). Let G be the additive group of C, and let Ω = {1, . . . , n} × F . Define
an action of G on Ω by
a : (i, x) 7→ (i, x + ai )
for a = (a1 , . . . , an ) ∈ F . This is an IBIS group. It acts on n|F | points,
and has rank equal to the dimension of the code; if there is no coordinate in
which all codewords are zero, then it has n orbits each of size |F |.
The classification problem for primitive IBIS groups is likely to be easier,
though even that has not yet been done. In [10], the IBIS groups whose
associated matroid is a uniform matroid are determined; these are Frobenius
and Zassenhaus groups and their analogues, that is, groups which, for some
positive integer t, are t-transitive and have the property that the pointwise
10

stabiliser of any t + 1 points is trivial. (The uniform matroid of rank r is the
one whose bases are all the sets of size r of the ground set.) All such finite
groups with t > 1 (that is, those which are not Frobenius groups) have been
explicitly determined (without using CFSG), by Zassenhaus, Feit, Ito and
Suzuki for t = 2, and by Gorenstein and Hughes for larger values.
(However, infinite examples are easy to construct and exist in profusion
– there is an action of the free group of countable rank with this property
for any value of t.)
It is also not known whether there is a similar geometric characterisation
of groups in which all greedy bases have the same size.
Blaha [8] showed that irredundant and greedy bases are not too much
larger than the smallest possible:
Theorem 2 Let G be a permutation group of degree n with minimal base
size b(G). Then
(a) any irredundant base for G has size at most b(G) log n (logarithm to
base 2);
(b) any greedy base for G has size at most b(G)(log log n + c).
Blaha proved that these bounds are essentially best possible. But for
primitive groups, stronger results should be possible. It is conjectured, for
example, that if G is primitive, then a greedy base for G has size at most
cb(G), where c is a universal constant. Indeed, the limit superior of the ratio
of greedy base size to base size, as b(G) → ∞, is conjectured to be 9/8. The
extreme examples involve the symmetric group Sm acting on the set of 2element subsets of {1, . . . , m}. The greedy algorithm chooses disjoint 2-sets
until almost all elements of {1, . . . , m} have been covered, and then has to
go back and extend two disjoint pairs to a path of length 4, giving a base of
size roughly 3m/4; on the other hand, covering most of {1, . . . , m} by paths
of length 3 gives a base of size roughly 2m/3.
Recently, Coen Del Valle and Colva Roney-Dougal have given the exact
value of the base size for the symmetric group of degree n acting on r-sets for
2 ≤ r ≤ n/2. The result is complicated to state, depending on the relative
sizes of n and r.
We conclude with two further occurrences of bases.
(a) The first fractional exponential bound for the order of a uniprimitive
(primitive but not 2-transitive) permutation group of degree n was
11

found by Babai [4].
√ He showed that such a group has a base whose size
is bounded by 4 n log n. It is clear that a group with degree n and a
base of size b has order at most nb . (Soon after Babai’s result appears,
it was observed that much stronger results could be found using the
classification of finite simple groups: a bound nc log n with “known”
exceptions. These exceptions are the so-called large-base groups which
are explained below.)
(b) Graph theorists have considered the metric dimension of a connected
graph, the smallest d for which there is a d-tuple (v1 , . . . , vd ) of vertices
such that any vertex is uniquely determined by its d-tuple of distances
from these vertices. It is clear that such a d-tuple is a base for the
automorphism group of the graph. The occurrence of similar concepts
in very different fields led to a lot of repetition and rediscovery, which
my survey with Robert Bailey [7] sets out to clear up.
These two things are related. Babai’s proof involved constructing from the
group a set of binary relations called a coherent configuration and showing
that this configuration has relatively small “dimension” (using the relations
in the configuration in place of graph distances).
A large-base group is either a symmetric or alternating group Sn or An in
its action on the set of k-subsets of {1, . . . , n}, or a subgroup of the wreath
product of such a group with the symmetric group of degree l containing the
socle Aln of this group. Their base sizes are fractional powers of the degree,
1/kl
and so their orders are roughly nn . Often in computational group theory
it is necessary to treat the large-base groups separately.
There has been a lot of very recent activity around permutation group
bases. Scott Harper remarked that the result about IBIS groups gives us
powerful information about permutation groups where all irredundant bases
have the same size, but the groups for which all minimal bases have the same
size has at present no comparable theory. One could ask similar questions
about “greedy bases” in Blaha’s sense.
It is also appropriate to mention here the work of Gill, Lodà and Spiga [18]
on a parameter they call height, which is the maximum size of an independent
set (where a set is independent if its pointwise stabiliser is properly contained
in the pointwise stabiliser of any subset). They show that the height of a
primitive permutation group of degree n which is not a large-base group is
smaller than 9 log n. This parameter then gives a bound for the relational
complexity of a permutation group, a parameter introduced by Cherlin [13,
12

14], in connection with the model theory of finite permutation groups: the
relational complexity is at most the height plus one.
To elaborate: the relational complexity of G is the least k for which G is
an automorphism group of a homogeneous relational structure with arity k;
more precisely, it is the least k such that, for any n ≥ k, if (a1 , . . . , an ) and
(b1 , . . . , bn ) are two n-tuples of points, they lie in the same G-orbit if and
only if all corresponding sub-k-tuples (ai1 , . . . , aik ) and (bi1 , . . . , bik ) lie in the
same G-orbit.
Gill et al. also prove a similar bound on the maximum size of an irredundant base for a primitive permutation group.

6

Finite group parameters

In this final section I discuss a few “measures” of a finite group which are
related to base size of permutation actions of the group. As we will see, some
of these can be defined in terms of the subgroup lattice of G, a topic with a
long history but still many open problems: see the book by Schmidt [25] for
a fairly recent account.
The smallest number d(G) of generators of G is not a good meaure of
size, since arbitrarily large finite groups (such as symmetric groups) are 2generated. We can avoid this problem as follows. If f is a function from
finite groups to natural numbers, let
f ↑ (G) = max{f (H) : H ≤ G}.
For any f , the function f ↑ is monotonic (in the sense that G ≤ H implies
f ↑ (G) ≤ f ↑ (H)). For example, for the symmetric groups, we have d↑ (Sn ) =
b n2 c for n > 3 (McIver and Neumann [23]).
Two other measures are
(a) µ(G) is the maximal size of a minimal (under inclusion) generating set
for G. The parameter µ(G) is important in the analysis of a random
walk on generating sets for G, see [15]. For the symmetric groups we
have µ(Sn ) = µ↑ (Sn ) = n − 1 (Whiston [29]).
(b) l(G) is the length of the largest subgroup chain in G. This is an interesting measure which bounds various other measures, and was considered
by Babai. It has the nice properties that it is monotonic and, if N is
13

a normal subgroup of G, then l(G) = l(N ) + l(G/N ); so its value is
determined by the composition factors of G. In 1982, I showed that


l(Sn ) =

3n
− b(n) − 1,
2


where b(n) is the number of 1s in the base 2 representation of n. This
appears in a paper with Solomon and Turull [11]; these authors have
computed l(G) for various simple groups G.
Gven a finite group G, we define three numbers b1 (G), b2 (G), b3 (G), as
follows. In each case, the maximum is taken over all permutation representations of G (not necessarily faithful).
• b1 (G) is the maximum, over all representations, of the maximum size
of an irredundant base;
• b2 (G) is the maximum, over all representations, of the maximum size
of a minimal base;
• b3 (G) is the maximum, over all representations, of the minimum base
size.
Clearly we have b3 (G) ≤ b2 (G) ≤ b1 (G). These inequalities can be strict.
The group G = PSL(2, 7) has b1 (G) = 5, b2 (G) = 4, and b3 (G) = 3.
Proposition 1 b1 (G) = l(G).
Proof An irredundant base (x1 , . . . , xk ) gives a descending chain of subgroups G = G0 > G1 > · · · > Gk , where Gi is the pointwise stabiliser
of {x1 , . . . , xi }. Conversely, given a chain of subgroups, take the union of
the coset spaces of these subgroups, and form a base by choosing the given
subgroups in the order given.
2
There is a connection between b2 and µ. Let B(n) denote the Boolean
lattice of subsets of an n-set, and L(G) the subgroup lattice of G.
Proposition 2 Let G be a finite group.
(a) The largest n such that B(n) is embeddable as a join-semilattice of
L(G) is µ↑ (G).
14

(b) The largest n such that B(n) is embeddable as a meet-semilattice of
L(G) in such a way that the minimal element is a normal subgroup of
G is b2 (G).
(c) B(n) is embeddable as a meet-semilattice in L(G) if and only if it is
embeddable as a join-semilattice.
Proof (a) If {g1 , . . . , gn } is an independent set in G, then the subgroups
generated by subsets of this set form a join semi-lattice isomorphic to B(n).
Conversely, given such a semi-lattice of the subgroup lattice, choose elements
gi contained in all the maximal subgroups except the ith.
(b) Given a minimal base of size n, the subgroups stabilising subsets
of the base form a meet-semilattice whose minimal element is the kernel
of the group action. Conversely, suppose we have an embedding of B(n)
as meet-semilattice. Then, reversing order, we have subgroups HI for each
I ⊆ N = {1, . . . , n}, with HN normal in G and Hi ∩ HJ = HI∪J . Consider
the permutation representation on the union of the coset spaces H{i} for
i ∈ N . The kernel of this representation is HN , and the subgroups H{i} form
a minimal base of size n.
(c) Suppose first that B(n) is a join-semilattice of L(G). Let N =
{1, . . . , n}. Then, for every subset I of N , there is a subgroup HI of G,
and HI∪J = hHI , HJ i for any two subsets I and J. Moreover, all these
subgroups are distinct. In particular, Hi 6≤ HN \{i} for all i (where Hi is
shorthand for H{i} ); else
HN = hHi , HN \{i} i = HN \{i} ,
contrary to assumption.
Let Ki = HN \{i} , and, for any I ⊆ N , put
KI =

\

Ki ,

i∈I

with the convention that K∅ = G. We claim that all the subgroups KI are
distinct. Suppose that two of them are equal, say KI = KJ . By interchanging
I and J if necessary, we may assume that there exists i ∈ I \ J. But then
Hi ≤ KJ while Hi 6≤ KI , a contradiction.
Now it is clear that KI ∩ KJ = KI∪J , so that we have an embedding of
B(n) as meet-semilattice (where we have reversed the order-isomorphism to
simplify the notation).
The reverse implication is proved by an almost identical argument.
2
15

It is not known whether the extra condition in (b) is really necessary:
perhaps b2 (G) = µ↑ (G) for any G. (Note that µ↑ (G) is the size of the largest
independent set of elements of G.)
Much less is known about b3 (G). If G is a non-abelian finite simple group,
then b3 (G) can be computed by looking only at the primitive actions of G.
One could ask similar questions about greedy bases. Nothing is known.
Another question: In which of these results can the use of CFSG be
avoided?
Acknowledgement I am very grateful to two reviewers whose careful and
thoughtful reviews have substantially improved this paper.

References
[1] J. Araújo, W. Bentz, P. J. Cameron, M. Kinyon and J. Konieczny, Matrix theory for independence algebras, Linear Algebra Appl. 642 (2022),
221–250.
[2] J. Araújo, M. Edmundo and S. Givant, v ∗ -algebras, independence algebras and logic, Int. J. Algebra Comput. 21 (2011), 1237–1257.
[3] J. Araújo and J. Fountain, The origins of independence algebras, in:
Semigroups and Languages, World Sci. Publ., River Edge, NJ, 2004, pp.
54–67.
[4] L. Babai, On the order of uniprimitive permutation groups, Ann. Math.
113 (1981), 553–568.
[5] L. Babai, On the length of subgroup chains in the symmetric group,
Commun. Algebra 14 (1986), 1729–1736.
[6] L. Babai, Graph isomorphism in quasipolynomial time,
1512.03547.

arXiv

[7] R. F. Bailey and P. J. Cameron, Base size, metric dimension and other
invariants of groups and graphs, Bull. London Math. Soc. 43 (2011)
209–242.
[8] K. D. Blaha, Minimal bases for permutation groups: the greedy approximation, J. Algorithms 13 (1992), 297–306.
16

[9] P. J. Cameron and M. Deza, On permutation geometries, J. London
Math. Soc. (2) 20 (1979), 373–386.
[10] P. J. Cameron and D. G. Fon-Der-Flaass, Bases for permutation groups
and matroids, Europ. J. Combinatorics 16 (1995), 537–544.
[11] P. J. Cameron, R. Solomon and A. Turull, Chains of subgroups in symmetric groups, J. Algebra 127 (1989), 340–352.
[12] P. J. Cameron and Cs. Szabó, Independence algebras, J. London Math.
Soc. (2) 61 (2000), 321–334.
[13] G. Cherlin, On the relational complexity of a finite permutation group,
J. Algebraic Combinatorics 43 (2016), 339–374.
[14] G. Cherlin, G. A. Martin, and D. H. Saracino, Arities of permutation
groups: Wreath products and k-sets, J. Combinatorial Theory Ser. A
74 (1996), 249–286.
[15] P. Diaconis and L. Saloff-Coste, Walks on generating sets of groups,
Invent. Math. 134 (1998), 251–299.
[16] J. Fountain and A. Lewin, Products of idempotent endomorphisms of
an independence algebra of finite rank, Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc. 35
(1992), 493–500.
[17] Jeffrey Giansiracusa and Noah Giansiracusa, A Grassmann algebra for
matroids, Manuscripta Math. 156 (2018), 187–213.
[18] Nick Gill, Bianca Lodà and Pablo Spiga, On the height and relational
complexity of a finite permutation group, Nagoya Math. J. 246 (2022),
372–411.
[19] V. Gould, Independence algebras, Algebra Univeralis 33 (1995), 294–
318.
[20] G. Grätzer, A theorem on doubly transitive permutation groups with
application to universal algebras, Fund. Math. 53 (1963), 25–41.
[21] W. Kerby, On infinite sharply multiply transitive groups, in: Hamburger Mathematische Einzelschriften, Neue Folge, Heft 6, Vandenhoeck
& Ruprecht, Göttingen, 1974, 71pp.
17

[22] T. Maund, Bases for permutation groups, D. Phil. Thesis, Oxford University, 1989.
[23] A. McIver and P. M. Neumann, Enumerating finite groups, Quart. J.
Math. (2) 38 (1987), 473–488.
[24] E. Rips, Y. Segev, K. Tent, A sharply 2-transitive group without a
non-trivial abelian normal subgroup, J. Europ. Math. Soc. 19 (2017),
2895–2910.
[25] Roland Schmidt, Subgroup Lattices of Groups, Expositions in Mathematics 14, Walter de Gruyter, 1994.
[26] C. C. Sims, Computational methods in the study of permutation groups,
Computational Problems in Abstract Algebra, Proc. Conf. Oxford 1967,
169–183 (1970).
[27] J. Tits, Sur les groupes doublement transitifs continus, Comment. Math.
Helv. 26 (1952), 203–224.
[28] K. Urbanik, Linear independence in abstract algebras, Colloq. Math. 14
(1966) 233–255.
[29] J. Whiston, Maximal independent generating sets of the symmetric
group, J. Algebra 232 (2000), 255–268.
[30] F. W. Wilke, Pseudo-fields and doubly transitive groups, Bull. Austral.
Math. Soc. 7 (1972), 163–168.
[31] H. Zassenhaus, Über endliche Fastkörper, Abh. Math. Semin. Univ.
Hamburg 11 (1935), 187–220.
[32] B. I. Zil’ber, Strongly minimal countably categorical theories. I, Sib.
Math. J. 21 (1980), 219–230; II, ibid. 25, 396–412 (1984); III, ibid. 25
(1984), 559–571. (Translations from Sib. Mat. Zh. 21 (1980), 25 (1984).)
[33] B. I. Zil’ber, Hereditarily transitive groups and quasi-Urbanik structures
(Russian), Tr. Inst. Mat. 8 (1988), 58–77
[34] B. I. Zil’ber, Finite homogeneous geometries, Seminarber., HumboldtUniv. Berlin, Sekt. Math. 98 (1988), 186–208.

18

