                                                 VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY
                                                               GROUPS

                                                 SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

                                                        Dedicated to Martin R. Bridson, on his 60th birthday
arXiv:2506.14666v1 [math.GR] 17 Jun 2025




                                                  Abstract. We show that a RFRS Poincaré-duality group G ad-
                                                  mits a virtual epimorphism to the integers whose kernel is itself
                                                  a Poincaré-duality group over every field if and only if the L2 -
                                                  homology of G vanishes and so do the positive-characteristic vari-
                                                  ants thereof.
                                                     Our investigations yield a more general relationship between
                                                  cohomology at infinity of groups that algebraically fibre and their
                                                  fibres. In particular, we show that if the fundamental group of an
                                                  aspherical manifold of dimension at least three algebraically fibres,
                                                  then the fibre is one ended.



                                                                        1. Introduction
                                              A smooth manifold that fibres over the circle can be understood
                                           not only as a static object, but also as a manifold of codimension
                                           one, the fibre, changing over time, with the dynamics controlled by
                                           the monodromy. This description is indeed helpful in many cases, for
                                           example in three-manifolds, where our understanding of the fibres and
                                           their homeomorphisms is very detailed.
                                              If a compact connected smooth manifold M fibres over the circle with
                                           fibre N (which then is also a manifold), on the level of fundamental
                                           groups there is a short exact sequence
                                                                1 → π1 (N ) → π1 (M ) → Z → 1.
                                           In particular, we get a surjective homomorphism π1 (M ) → Z whose
                                           kernel K = π1 (N ) is the fundamental group of a compact manifold.
                                           If M is additionally aspherical, then so is N and we deduce that the
                                           kernel K is a group admitting a compact classifying space (a group of
                                           type F), and hence the cellular chain complex of the universal cover
                                           of the classifying space is a finite resolution by finitely generated pro-
                                           jective ZK-modules of the trivial module Z (that is, K is of type FP).
                                           Hence, admitting a fibration over the circle is reflected in the algebraic
                                           structure of π1 (M ).
                                              This statement has a strong converse in the realm of three-manifolds:
                                           as proved by Stallings [Sta62], if the fundamental group of a compact
                                           irreducible three-manifold maps onto the integers with a finitely gen-
                                           erated kernel that is not Z/2Z, then the three-manifold fibres over the
                                                                                   1
2        SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

circle in a way inducing the given epimorphism. The condition on the
kernel not being Z/2Z can now be dropped thanks to the resolution of
the Poincaré Conjecture.
   In higher dimensions, there is a result of Farrell [Far67]: if M is
a closed aspherical smooth manifold of dimension at least six, then
an epimorphism π1 (M ) → Z is induced by a fibration if and only if its
kernel admits a model for its classifying space that is finitely dominated,
and a certain K-theoretic obstruction vanishes. The first condition can
be rephrased by asking for the kernel to be finitely presented and of
type FP.
   The situation changes if instead of asking whether a specific epimor-
phism to the integers comes from fibring, we ask if such an epimorphism
exists at all. Going back to three-manifolds, a central theme in their
study that emerged due to the groundbreaking insights of Thurston
was that it is often interesting not only to understand when a given
manifold fibres over the circle, but also when it virtually fibres, that is,
admits a finite-sheeted covering that fibres. Thurston conjectured that
this should be the case for all finite-volume hyperbolic three-manifolds,
and this conjecture was confirmed by Wise [Wis12] in the cusped case
and Agol [Ago13] in the closed case.
   Both proofs consist of two main steps. The first step shows that
fundamental groups of hyperbolic three-manifolds virtually (i.e. up to
finite index) have the RFRS property. For a finitely generated group,
the RFRS condition is equivalent to being residually {virtually abelian
and locally indicable}, and so it is a strong residual property. To estab-
lish that a group is virtually RFRS, one usually goes via the Haglund–
Wise theory of special cube complexes [HW08], and this is indeed how
Wise and Agol proceed, in the cusped case using in fundamental ways
the work of Culler–Shalen [CS84], and in the closed case that of Kahn–
Marković [KM12] and Bergeron–Wise [BW12].
   The second step of the proofs is an application of another theo-
rem of Agol [Ago08], stating that a compact irreducible three-manifold
with RFRS fundamental group virtually fibres if and only if its Euler
characteristic is zero. There are many ways of computing the Euler
characteristic; for our purpose, we will focus on its being the alternat-
ing sum of Betti numbers, and thus a homological invariant. Hence,
Agol established that for RFRS three-manifold groups, virtual fibring
is controlled by a homological invariant.
   This statement has algebraic counterparts: first it was shown in
[Kie20] that if G is an infinite RFRS group, then G admits a virtual
epimorphism to the integers with a finitely generated kernel if and only
if the first L2 -Betti number of G vanishes. Soon afterwards, Jaikin-
Zapirain [JZ21, Appendix] introduced the theory of L2 -Betti numbers
over ground fields other than Q for RFRS groups. This was then used
by the first author, who in [Fis24a] showed that G admits a virtual
           VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                   3

epimorphism to Z with kernel of type FPn (K) if and only if the L2 -
Betti numbers of G over K vanish up to degree n. We will introduce
all of these notions in the main text – the key point for now is that,
as in Agol’s case, virtual algebraic fibring is controlled by homological
invariants, namely various versions of L2 -homology.
   The question motivating our investigations here is: do homologi-
cal invariants control virtual fibring of compact aspherical manifolds
with RFRS fundamental groups also beyond dimension three? In view
of Farrell’s result, one has to find ways of controlling finiteness prop-
erties of kernels of virtual epimorphisms to Z, and the K-theoretic
obstruction. Thanks to the work of Siebenmann [Sie70], we see that
this obstruction lives in the Whitehead group of the manifold, and this
group is known to vanish in many cases of interest for us, most notably
when the fundamental group of the manifold is compact special in the
sense of Haglund–Wise – such groups are CAT(0), and hence satisfy the
Farrell–Jones Conjecture, as proved by Bartels–Lück [BL12]. There-
fore, it is reasonable to focus first on securing the relevant finiteness
properties.
   Establishing finite presentability seems to be out of reach of current
methods. We therefore focus on type FP. Since this is a solely homo-
logical property, it would be too restrictive to stay within the realm of
compact aspherical manifolds. A more natural setting is provided by
Poincaré-duality groups – they are of type FP, and their homology is
related to their cohomology precisely in the same way as in the case
of compact aspherical manifolds. More generally, given a field K we
can talk about Poincaré duality over K, where the group is of type
FP(K) and the duality between homology and cohomology only applies
to KG-modules as coefficients. In this generality, we offer the following
result.
Theorem A. Let K be a field and G be a RFRS orientable Poincaré-
duality group of dimension n > 0 over K. The following are equivalent:
   (1) There exists a finite-index subgroup G0 in G and an epimor-
        phism ϕ : G0 → Z such that ker ϕ is an orientable Poincaré-
        duality group of dimension n − 1 over K;
                                  (2)
   (2) For every i ⩽ n we have βi (G; K) = 0.
  In fact, we can also deal with all fields simultaneously, but this re-
quires a stronger assumption on G.
Theorem B. Let G be a RFRS orientable Poincaré-duality group of
dimension n > 0. The following are equivalent:
   (1) There exists a finite-index subgroup G0 in G and an epimor-
       phism ϕ : G0 → Z such that ker ϕ is an orientable Poincaré-
       duality group of dimension n − 1 over all fields;
                                                       (2)
   (2) For all i ⩽ n and all prime fields K, we have βi (G; K) = 0.
4        SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

   Using coincidences of small dimensions, we obtain a sharper result
in dimension four.
Corollary C. Let G be a RFRS Poincaré-duality group of dimension
four. The following are equivalent:
   (1) There exists a finite-index subgroup G0 ⩽ G and an epimor-
       phism ϕ : G0 → Z such that ker ϕ is an orientable Poincaré-
       duality group of dimension three;
                  (2)          (2)
   (2) We have β1 (G; Q) = β2 (G; Q) = 0.
                        (2)
   The Betti numbers βi (G; Q) appearing above are the usual L2 -Betti
            (2)
numbers βi (G).
   In the process of proving the results above, we establish a relationship
between cohomology at infinity of any group G and algebraic fibres
sitting within.
Theorem D. Let R be a ring. Let G be a group with an epimorphism
ϕ : G → Z. If K = ker ϕ is of type FPn (R) then
                    Hi+1 (G; RG) ∼ = Hi (K; RK)
as RK-modules for all i < n and Hn (K; RK) is isomorphic as an
RK-module to a submodule of Hn+1 (G; RG).
    Applying the theorem with i = 1 yields the following.
Corollary E. Let M be a closed aspherical manifold of dimension at
least three. If ϕ : π1 (M ) → Z is an epimorphism with finitely generated
kernel, then the kernel has only one end.
Outline of the arguments. The key technical tool is Novikov ho-
mology, that is group homology with coefficients in a Novikov ring. If
we have a homomorphism ϕ : G → Z and a ring R, the Novikov ring
d ϕ is the ring of twisted Laurent power series in t with coefficients in
RG
ker ϕ, where t ∈ G is such that ϕ(t) is the positive generator of Z, and
the twisting comes from the conjugation action of t on ker ϕ. Novikov
homology controls the homological finiteness properties of ker ϕ.
   The first observation we make is that vanishing of Novikov homology
also gives vanishing of Novikov cohomology (Corollary 3.2). This has
already been used in a more restricted form in [BKK25]. Then we
formulate a long exact sequence relating the Novikov cohomology of
G, and the cohomology at infinity of G and ker ϕ (Proposition 3.4).
This is essentially enough to prove Theorem D. A similar long exact
sequence appeared already in [Fis24b].
   The final technical novelty is Proposition 3.6, in which we show that
having vanishing Novikov homology over Q gives analogous vanishing
for finite prime fields Fp , except possibly for finitely many primes.
   We then turn our attention to a RFRS group G. We fix a collection
                                               (2)
of fields K, and prove that vanishing of βi (G; K) for all i ⩽ n and
           VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                    5

all fields K ∈ K is equivalent to virtual algebraic fibring with kernel
of type FPn (K) for every K ∈ K simultaneously (Theorem 5.3). This
holds when K satisfies a certain property – the two key cases are that
of a single field, or all prime fields. In the latter case, this relies on
Proposition 3.6; in both cases we need the virtual algebraic fibring
theorems of the first and third authors.
   Finally, for RFRS Poincaré-duality groups, we combine Theorem 5.3,
the vanishing of Novikov cohomology, and Theorem D, and obtain The-
orem B as a result.
   The entire paper is written in the generality of group pairs (G, H).
This makes the arguments perhaps a little less transparent, but is natu-
ral, since for both aspherical manifolds and Poincaré-duality groups one
often wants to argue by using manifolds with boundary or Poincaré-
duality pairs.

Acknowledgements. The first author is grateful to Andrei Jaikin-
Zapirain for a useful correspondence and is supported by the National
Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (ref. no. 567804-
2022).
   The second author gratefully acknowledges support from the Royal
Society through the Newton International Fellowship (award number:
NIF\R1\231857).
   The third author is grateful to Sami Douba for raising the question
of one-endedness of algebraic fibres.
   This work has received funding from the European Research Council
(ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innova-
tion programme (Grant agreement No. 850930).
   For the purpose of Open Access, the authors have applied a CC BY
public copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript (AAM)
version arising from this submission.

                          2. Preliminaries
2.1. Modules. Throughout, all rings will be associative, unital, and
non-zero. The symbol R will always denote such a ring.
   In Sections 2.7 and 5.2 we will be more restrictive, and will only look
at commutative rings. In fact, the true focus of the paper is the ring
Z and various fields.
   We will have a preference for left modules; in particular, resolu-
tions will be by left modules. This means that the natural modules
to consider as coefficients in cohomology will be left modules, but in
homology one should use right modules. It is however customary to
follow [Bro82], and to put left modules as coefficients in homology as
well: when computing homology with coefficients in a left module M ,
we tensor a resolution on the left with M ∗ , the right module obtained
from M by twisting the group action of G by the anti-automorphism
6       SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

g 7→ g −1 . When M is a bimodule, its left-module structure is used in
the computation of homology, but its right-module structure remains
– after twisting, it turns into a left-module structure and descends to
a left-module structure for the homology.
2.2. Characters. Let G be a finitely generated group. The character
cone of G is the set S(G) of non-zero characters ϕ : G → R; alterna-
tively,
                      S(G) = H1 (G; R) ∖ {0}.
Then S(G) inherits a topology by viewing it as a subspace of
                        H1 (G; R) ∼
                                  = Rβ1 (G) .
The elements of S(G) will be called characters.
  When G0 is a finite-index subgroup of G then S(G) is naturally a
subspace of S(G0 ). For a general subgroup H ⩽ G we have the induced
continuous map H1 (G; R) → H1 (H; R), which we may restrict to S(G),
but its image is not guaranteed to lie in S(H).
2.3. Novikov rings. Given a group G we denote the group ring of G
with coefficients in R by RG. We will identify RG with the abelian
group of functions G → R of finite support, where the support supp x of
x : G → R is x−1 (R∖{0}). Multiplication is then given by convolution.
   Given a homomorphism ϕ : G → R, we define the Novikov ring of
G with respect to ϕ, denoted RG d ϕ , to be the abelian group of those
functions G → R whose support intersected with ϕ−1 ((−∞, κ]) is finite
for every κ ∈ R. Convolution endows this abelian group with a ring
structure.
                     d ϕ contains RG, and hence is naturally an RG-
   The Novikov ring RG
bimodule.
   Given an element x : G → R of the Novikov ring RG d ϕ and a constant
κ ∈ R, we define the truncation of x at κ to be the function G → R
with                       
                              x(g) if ϕ(g) ⩽ κ,
                      g 7→
                                0    otherwise.
It follows immediately from the definition of the Novikov ring that
such a truncation is actually a function of finite support, and hence an
element of the group ring RG.
              d ϕ , we say that it has positive support if
   Given x ∈ RG
                         ϕ(supp x) ⊆ (0, ∞).
For every x, the truncation x of x at 0 has the property that x − x has
positive support.
  There is an alternative way of viewing Novikov rings when im(ϕ) ∼= Z:
take t ∈ G such that ϕ(t) is the positive generator of im(ϕ), with
the ordering inherited from im(ϕ) < R. As an R(ker ϕ)-module, the
           VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                       7

                   ϕ
Novikov ring RG
              d is isomorphic to the ring of twisted Laurent series
over R(ker ϕ) with variable t, with twisting induced by conjugation.
                                                                  dϕ
                          as an R ker ϕ-module, the Novikov ring RG
  Either way, we see that Q
embeds into the module i∈Z (R ker ϕ)ti , the module of all functions
G → R whose support intersected with ϕ−1 ([−κ, κ]) is finite for every
κ ∈ R. This latter module is easily seen to be an RG-bimodule.
  If H ⩽ G is a finite-index subgroup, it is easy to see that RG  dϕ
coincides as an RG-module with the RG-module induced from the
RH-module RH d ϕ|H .
  For general subgroups, we have the following.
Lemma 2.1. Let G be a group, let R be a ring, and let H ⩽ G be a
                    d ϕ ) = 0 for some ϕ : G → R and n ⩾ 0, then
subgroup. If Hn (H; RG
       d ϕ|H ) = 0.
Hn (H; RH
                         d ϕ are functions G → R, we can restrict
Proof. Since elements of RG
them to H to obtain an RH-module homomorphism RG d ϕ → RHd ϕ|H .
                      d ϕ|H ,→ RG
The natural inclusion RH        d ϕ splits this homomorphism, which
           d ϕ|H is a direct summand of RG
shows that RH                            d ϕ ; the result then follows
at once.                                                            □

2.4. Finiteness properties. We will follow the standard (that is,
Bieri’s [Bie81]) notation for finiteness properties. In particular, a group
G will be of type FPn (R) if the trivial RG-module R admits a resolution
by left projective RG-modules
                        · · · → P 1 → P0 → R → 0
with Pi finitely generated for every i ⩽ n (we allow n = ∞ here); the
group will be of type FP(R) if there is a finite resolution of R by finitely
generated projective modules.
   If the ring R is not specified, then we are taking the respective prop-
erty over Z; this is reasonable, since being of type FPn (Z) implies being
of type FPn (R) for every ring R. More generally, if S is an R-algebra,
then being of type FPn (R) implies being of type FPn (S).
   All of the finiteness properties listed here pass to subgroups of finite
index.
   We say that a group G has cohomological dimension n over R if the
trivial RG-module R admits a projective resolution of length n, but
does not admit such a resolution of length n−1. We write cdR (G) = n.
   We always have cdR (G) ⩽ n if Hi (G; M ) = 0 for every RG-module M
and all i > n – this follows from [Bro82, Sections III.7 and VIII.2]. In
fact, an alternative definition of cdR (G) is that it is the supremal integer
n for which there exists an RG-module M such that Hn (G; M ) ̸= 0.
8             SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

   If G is a group of type FP(R), we have cdR (G) = n if and only if
H (G; RG) = 0 for all i > n and Hn (G; RG) ̸= 0. This is proved pre-
    i

cisely like [Bro82, Proposition VIII.6.7] by changing coefficients from
Z to R.
   As before, cd stands for cdZ , which is again sensible notation since
cdZ (G) ⩾ cdR (G) for every group G and every ring R.
2.5. Chain contractions. Throughout the article, we will make mul-
tiple uses of chain contractions, which we introduce here. Let R be a
ring and let
                          · · · → C1 → C0 → 0
be a chain complex of free R-modules with boundary maps
                                  ∂i : Ci → Ci−1 .
A chain contraction of C• is a collection of R-module homomorphisms
si : Ci → Ci+1 such that
                               idCi = ∂i si−1 + si ∂i+1
for all i ⩾ 0, with s−1 = 0. If there only exist maps si satisfying the
same condition for 0 ⩽ i ⩽ n, then we call the collection s0 , s1 , . . . , sn
a partial chain contraction of length n of C• . By a slight abuse of
terminology, we will also refer to the individual maps si as chain con-
tractions. It is clear that if there exists a partial chain contraction of
length n, then Hi (C• ) = 0 for all i ⩽ n. An easy exercise in homological
algebra shows that the converse is also true.
Lemma 2.2. Let C• be a chain complex of free R-modules with no
negative terms. Then Hi (C• ) = 0 for all i ⩽ n if and only if C• admits
a partial chain contraction of length n.
        We will often use this result in the following guise.
Corollary 2.3. Let G be a group, let R be a ring, and let S be an
RG-algebra. Let C• → R be a free resolution of the trivial RG-module
R. Then Hi (G; S) = 0 for all i ⩽ n if and only if the chain complex
S ⊗RG C• of free left S-modules admits a partial chain contraction of
length n.
   As an immediate consequence we see that if S ′ is another RG-algebra
and there is a morphism σ : S → S ′ of RG-algebras, then vanishing of
Hi (G; S) for all i ⩽ n implies the vanishing of Hi (G; S ′ ) for all i ⩽ n.
To see this, apply σ to a partial chain contraction over S.
2.6. Generalised Sikorav’s theorem. In his thesis [Sik87, Chapter
IV], Sikorav proved that if ϕ : G → Z is an epimorphism with finitely
generated domain, then ker ϕ is finitely generated if and only if
                                   ϕ                      −ϕ
                         H1 (G; ZG
                                ” ) = 0 = H1 (G; ZG
                                                 ”             ).
           VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                   9

Throughout the article, we will abbreviate such vanishing by writing
                                     ±ϕ
                           H1 (G; ZG
                                  ”       ) = 0,
and similarly for Novikov rings over other coefficients.
   Sikorav formulated his theorem in the language of Bieri–Neumann–
Strebel (BNS) invariants [BNS87], which has the advantage of giving
                                                          ϕ
meaning to the vanishing of Novikov homology for ZG   ” only; we are
not going to do that, since the introduction of the BNS-invariants is not
necessary, and we will always have the vanishing of Novikov homologies
         ±ϕ
over ZG
      ” .
   A related result was proved by Ranicki [Ran95, Theorem 1] – here
the statement connects the vanishing of Novikov homologies in all di-
mensions to higher finiteness properties of the kernel, but only applies
in the very restricted situation where G ∼= ker ϕ × im(ϕ).
   Combining the initial insight of Sikorav with the work of Bieri, Renz,
and Schweitzer [BR88, Bie07], the first author proved the following
result.
Theorem 2.4 (Generalised Sikorav’s Theorem, [Fis24a, Theorems 5.3
and 6.5]). Let G be a group of type FPn (R) for some ring R, and let
ϕ : G → Z be an epimorphism. The following are equivalent:
   (1) ker ϕ is of type FPn (R);
              d ±ϕ ) = 0 for all i ⩽ n.
   (2) Hi (G; RG
  A character ϕ satisfying any of the two equivalent conditions will be
called FPn (R)-fibred.
Remark 2.5. Being FPn (R)-fibred is an open condition, that is, if ϕ
is FPn (R)-fibred then there exists an open neighbourhood U of ϕ in
S(G) such that every character in U is FPn (R)-fibred. For a proof, see
[BR88, Theorems A and B].
2.7. Poincaré duality and group pairs. Throughout this subsec-
tion, R will be a commutative ring. This assumption seems necessary
to ensure that the theory of Poincaré duality behaves well under pass-
ing to finite-index overgroups. However, we will never perform the
operation of passing to such an overgroup, and hence it is possible (in-
deed, likely) that our discussion holds verbatim for rings R that are
not necessarily commutative.
Definition 2.6 (Poincaré-duality group). We will say that a group G
is a Poincaré-duality group of dimension n over R, or a PDnR -group for
short, if the group is of type FP(R) and
                                   
                                      0 if i ̸= n,
                     H (G; RG) ∼
                       i
                                 =
                                      R if i = n,
10      SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

where the isomorphism is one of R-modules. The action of RG on
R = Hn (G; RG) is the orientation action; if it is trivial, the PDnR
group is orientable.

   It follows immediately from the definition that cdR (G) = n.
   The definition above follows that of Bieri [Bie72, Bie81] for R = Z,
and that of Dicks–Dunwoody [DD89, Chapter V] for arbitrary commu-
tative coefficients (though [Bie72, Section 3.2] briefly discusses the case
of a general R, quickly focusing on R = Q).
   We are not requiring the group G above to be finitely presented –
this way we deviate from the alternative definition of Poincaré-duality
groups due to Wall [Wal67]. Also, when R = Z, the underlying ring is
often purged from the notation, and one talks simply about (orientable)
Poincaré-duality groups in dimension n.
   By a group pair (G, H) we will understand a pair of a group G and
a tuple H of subgroups of G (formally, a function from some possibly
infinite indexing set to the set of subgroups of G). If H is non-empty, we
defineL the associated module ∆G/H to be the kernel of the augmentation
map H∈H RG/H → R, with

                          RG/H = RG ⊗RH R

being the free abelian group on the left cosets of H, with the obvious
G action.
  Let (G, H) be a group pair and let M be an RG-module. The ho-
mology and cohomology of the pair (G, H) with coefficients in M are
defined by

                   Hi (G, H; M ) = TorRG
                                      i−1 (∆G/H , M )

                   Hi (G, H; M ) = ExtRG
                                      i−1
                                          (∆G/H , M )

respectively, provided H ̸= ∅ (see [BE78, Section I.1] and [DD89, Sec-
tion V.7]). By convention, Hi (G, ∅; M ) = Hi (G; M ), and similarly for
cohomology. This definition is quite useful, because one immediately
sees that given a short exact sequence 0 → M1 → M2 → M3 → 0 of
RG-modules, there are associated long exact sequences in the homology
and cohomology of pairs.
   Group pairs appear naturally, as they correspond to the notion of
a pair of spaces. Crucially, group pairs satisfy the familiar long ex-
act sequence in cohomology, which is just the long exact sequence in
Ext•RG (−, M ) associated to the short exact sequence
                                 M
                  0 → ∆G/H →           RG/H → R → 0.
                                 H∈H
          VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                 11

Proposition 2.7. Let (G, H) be a group pair, and let M be an RG-
module. We have the following long exact sequence in cohomology
            Hn (G, H; M )     Hn (G; M )            n
                                           Q
      ···                                    H∈H H (H; M )




            Hn+1 (G, H; M )    ···
where M is an RH-module by restriction.
   When R = Z, the above is [BE78, Proposition 1.1]. For general R,
one easily obtains an analogous long exact sequence in homology.
   Given a subgroup G0 ⩽ G, we define HG0 to be the tuple ob-
tained from H by replacing each H ∈ H by the subgroups of the
form x−1 Hx ∩ G0 where x runs over the double-coset representatives of
H\G/G0 . One readily checks that ∆G/H restricted to being an RG0 -
module is isomorphic to ∆G0 /HG0 .
   When G0 = ker ϕ for a homomorphism ϕ with domain G, we refer
to Hker ϕ as Hϕ .
Definition 2.8 (Poincaré-duality pair). Following [BE78,DD89], given
a group G and a non-empty tuple H of subgroups of G, we say that
(G, H) is an orientable Poincaré-duality pair of dimension n over R (or
orientable PDnR -pair ) if the group G is of type FP(R) and
                                 
                   i          ∼      0      if i ̸= n − 1,
                 H (G; RG) =
                                   ∆G/H if i = n − 1,
where the isomorphism is that of RG-modules.
  For convenience, we define (G, ∅) to be an orientable Poincaré-
duality pair of dimension n over R if G is an orientable PDnR -group.
  If R is not specified, then it is taken to be Z.
  Again, directly from the definition follows that cdR (G) = n − 1.
  Replacing Z by R in the proof of [BE78, Theorem 6.2], and noting
that we are in the orientable case, yields that (G, H) for H =
                                                             ̸ ∅ is an
              n
orientable PDR -pair if and only if
                                    
                                       0 if i ̸= n,
                   H (G, H; RG) ∼
                     i
                                  =
                                       R if i = n,
as RG-modules, where the action on R is trivial, and the pair (G, H) is
of type FP(R), meaning that ∆G/H admits a finite resolution by finitely
generated projective RG-modules (see also [DD89, Definition V.7.1]).
Proposition 2.9. If (G, H) is an orientable PDnR -pair with H = ̸ ∅,
                                                            n−1
then H is finite, and every H ∈ H is itself an orientable PDR -group.
Proof. When R = Z, this is [BE78, Theorem 4.2(ii) and (iii)]. For gen-
eral commutative R, the second assertion is covered by [DD89, Theorem
V.7.11].
12       SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

   Since the RG-module ∆G/H admits a finite resolution by finitely
generated projective RG-modules, it must be finitely generated, which
is only possible if H is finite.                                   □
Remark 2.10. Somewhat unsurprisingly, Poincaré-duality groups and
pairs have the familiar duality between between homology and coho-
mology. Concretely, given an RG-module M , a possibly empty H, and
an orientable PDnR -pair (G, H) we have natural isomorphisms
                      Hi (G, H; M ) ∼
                                    = Hn−i (G; M ),
for all integers i, and similarly starting from homology of the pair, see
[BE78, Definition 4.1 and Theorem 6.2] and [DD89, Definition V.7.1].
  As in the case of finiteness properties, if (G, H) is an orientable PDnR -
pair and S is an R-algebra, then (G, H) is an orientable PDnS -pair (see
[DD89, Proposition V.3.7]). We will use this fact in a situation where
R is a prime field and S is another field of the same characteristic.
2.8. RFRS. A group G is residually finite rationally solvable (RFRS)
if it admits a normal residual chain G = G0 ⩾ G1 ⩾ G2 ⩾ . . . of
finite-index subgroups such that
                  ker(Gi → Q ⊗Z Gi /[Gi , Gi ]) ⩽ Gi+1
for all i ⩾ 0. For finitely generated groups, a simpler characterisation
was recently obtained by Okun, Schreve, and the first and third au-
thors: a finitely generated group G is RFRS if and only if it is residually
{virtually abelian and locally indicable} [OS25, Theorem 6.3]. Since for
finitely generated groups being virtually abelian and locally indicable
is the same as being virtually abelian and poly-Z, we see that a finitely
generated group G is RFRS if and only if it is residually {virtually
abelian and poly-Z} as well.
   The RFRS condition was introduced by Agol in [Ago08], where he
proved that a compact, irreducible 3-manifold M with virtually RFRS
fundamental group virtually fibres over S 1 if and only if χ(M ) = 0.
2.9. L2 -Betti numbers over fields. Since our focus in this paper
is on RFRS groups, we will present the algebraic approach to L2 -
homology via Linnell skew-fields. We will also need the positive char-
acteristic version of L2 -homology, that is (for now) only defined in an
algebraic way.
   When G is RFRS and K is a field, Jaikin-Zapirain in [JZ21] con-
structs a skew-field DKG that contains KG as a subring, and has two
additional properties: the embedding KG ⊆ DKG is Hughes-free, and
the skew-field DKG is universal. The precise meaning of these adjec-
tives is not really essential for us here; one important consequence of
Hughes-freeness is that DKG is unique up to isomorphisms of skew-fields
containing KG that fix KG (this result is due to Hughes [Hug70]). We
will therefore treat DKG as well-defined unique objects.
           VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                    13

  When K = Q, the construction of DQG is older, as it goes back to
Linnell [Lin93], and it works in a much greater generality than that of
RFRS groups. Jaikin-Zapirain’s definition also covers a larger class of
groups.
Definition 2.11. Given a RFRS group G and a field K, we define
               (2)
             βi (G; K) = dimDKG Hi (G; DKG ) ∈ N ⊔ {∞}
to be the ith L2 -Betti number of G over K.
                                             (2)
   The notation stems from the fact that βi (G; Q) coincides with the
                                (2)
classical ith L2 -Betti number βi (G). More information about this can
be found in [Lin93] and [Lüc02, Chapter 10].
   One of the key properties of L2 -Betti numbers over fields is the way
they behave under passing to finite index.
Lemma 2.12 ([Fis24a, Lemma 6.3]). Let G0 be a finite-index subgroup
of a RFRS group G. For all i and all fields K we have
                      (2)                   (2)
                     βi (G0 ; K) = |G : G0 |βi (G; K).
   Another important property of L2 -Betti numbers is that they vanish
for mapping tori.
Theorem 2.13 (Mapping Torus Theorem, [Fis24a, Theorem 6.4]).
Suppose that G is a RFRS group, that ϕ : G → Z is an epimorphism,
                                                         (2)
and let K be a field. If ker ϕ is of type FPn (K), then βi (G; K) = 0 for
every i ⩽ n.
   For K = Q this is a celebrated theorem of Lück [Lüc94] (see also
[Lüc02, Theorem 7.2]), which holds for many more groups.
   The stated theorem can be generalised also in another way: instead
                                                         (2)
of requiring ker ϕ to be of type FP(K), if we insist on βi (ker ϕ; K) < ∞
for all i, then the conclusion holds even when the quotient Z is replaced
by any infinite amenable group [FK24, Proposition 3.18] – when K = Q,
this result is due to Gaboriau [Gab02, Théorème 6.6].
   The Mapping Torus Theorem has a partial inverse, the Virtual Al-
gebraic Fibring Theorem. We will need more than the final statement,
and to this end we need to introduce a couple of additional objects.
   There are a number of consequences of Hughes-freeness: when H is
a subgroup of G, we have a natural embedding DKH ⊆ DKG . If H
is normal, the conjugation action of G on H induces an action of G
on DKH , and this can be used to define a crossed product DKH G/H.
The crossed product naturally sits inside DKG , and when H is of finite
index, the two rings coincide [JZ21, Proposition 2.2].
   Let G0 be a finite-index normal subgroup of G, and let ϕ : G0 → R be
a non-trivial homomorphism. We may view KG0 as a crossed product
(K ker ϕ) im(ϕ). This ring sits inside DK ker ϕ (im ϕ), and its Ore locali-
sation, which is DKG0 , lies inside the Malcev–Neumann completion of
14            SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

DK ker ϕ (im ϕ) with respect to the biorder on im ϕ inherited from R.
                                        id                            ϕ
This last ring contains D¤ K ker ϕ im(ϕ) , which in turn contains KG0 .
                                                                  ‘
All of this yoga shows that it makes sense to consider the intersection
                   ϕ
of DKG and KG
          0
               ‘0 . For an element of DKG , we will say that it lies in
                                                 0
      ϕ
‘0 if it is contained in this intersection.
KG
  Given a subset U ⊆ S(G0 ), we will say that an element of DKG0 lies
      U                  ϕ
in KG                ‘0 for all ϕ ∈ U . All such elements form a
   ‘0 if it lies in KG
                                             U
ring that we will denote by DKG0 ∩ KG‘0 . The key point here is that
                                                             ϕ
for different characters ϕ, we are intersecting DKG0 and KG
                                                         ‘0 inside
different ambient rings.
   When U is invariant under the conjugation action of G (or, equiva-
lently, of G/G0 ), then we may form a crossed product
                                         U
                            (DKG0 ∩ KG
                                    ‘0 )G/G0 .

Since DKG = DKG0 G/G0 , we may again talk about elements of DKG
                   U
lying in (DKG ∩ KG
                ‘0 )G/G0 .
                  0


Theorem 2.14. Let G be a finitely generated RFRS group, and let
K be a field. For every finite subset S ⊆ DKG there exists a normal
subgroup G0 ⩽ G of finite index and an open subset U ⊆ S(G0 ) such
that
     (1) U is invariant under the conjugation action of G and under the
         antipodal map;
         ˚, the interior of the closure of U , contains S(G);
     (2) U
                                                    U
     (3) all the elements of S lie in (DKG ∩ KG
                                             0
                                                ‘0 )G/G0 .

   The theorem is not stated this way anywhere. It is a slight weakening
of [Kie20, Theorem 4.13] and [JZ21, Theorem 5.10], see also [Fis24a,
OS25].
   The Virtual Algebraic Fibring Theorem is a direct consequence.
Theorem 2.15 (Virtual Algebraic Fibring Theorem, [Fis24a, Theorem
6.6]). Let K be a field and let G be a virtually RFRS group of type
FPn (K). The following are equivalent.
     (1) There exists a finite-index subgroup G0 in G and an epimor-
         phism ϕ : G0 → Z such that ker ϕ is of type FPn (K);
          (2)
     (2) βi (G; K) = 0 for all i ⩽ n.

                               3. Main tools
3.1. Novikov cohomology. The following observation appeared al-
ready in [BKK25].
           VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                 15

Proposition 3.1. Let C• be a chain complex of free left RG-modules
                               d ϕ ⊗RG C• ) = 0 for all i ⩽ n then
without negative terms. If Hi (RG
                                             ϕ
                        Hi (HomRG (C• , RG
                                        d )) = 0

for all i ⩽ n.
                                                 d ϕ ⊗RG C• ) allows us
Proof. Let C• = (Ci , ∂i ). The vanishing of Hi (RG
                                                  d ϕ -homomorphisms
to construct a partial chain contraction, that is RG
     d ϕ ⊗RG Ci → RG
si : RG             d ϕ ⊗RG Ci+1 for i ⩽ n such that

                      ∂i si−1 + si ∂i+1 = idRG
                                            d ϕ⊗     RG Ci


for i ⩽ n, with s−1 = 0. (We are abusing notation slightly, since we use
                                         d ϕ ⊗RG Ci → RG
∂i here to mean its natural extension to RG            d ϕ ⊗RG Ci−1 .)
                                      d ϕ . Since RG
 Take i ⩽ n and an i-cocycle z : Ci → RG          d ϕ is a left
d ϕ -module, the cocycle z extends to
RG
                     d ϕ ⊗RG Ci → RG
                 z : RG           d ϕ , ξ ⊗ c 7→ ξ.z(c).

We get
                    z = (∂i si−1 + si ∂i+1 )z = ∂i si−1 z,
and restricting both sides to Ci gives
                            z = ∂i ◦ (si−1 z)|Ci ,
showing that z is a coboundary.                                       □

   Applying the above to C• being a free resolution of R yields the
following.
Corollary 3.2. Let G be a group and ϕ : G → R a homomorphism. If
                                            d −ϕ ) = 0 for all i ⩽ n.
       d ϕ ) = 0 for all i ⩽ n, then Hi (G; RG
Hi (G; RG

  The change of coefficients from RG        d −ϕ is an artifact of no-
                                    d ϕ to RG
                                                d ϕ in Hi (G; RG
tation: as explained in Section 2.1, the module RG            d ϕ ) is
a left RG-module. But when computing homology, we tensor C• on
                                                      d −ϕ as a right
                               d ϕ )∗ , isomorphic to RG
the left by the right module (RG
RG-module.
  Combining the above with Theorem 2.4 yields the following.
Corollary 3.3. Let G be a group and ϕ : G → Z an epimorphism. The
following are equivalent:
   (1) ker ϕ is of type FPn (R);
              d ±ϕ ) = 0 = Hi (G; RG
   (2) Hi (G; RG                  d ±ϕ ) for all i ⩽ n.
16      SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

3.2. Long exact sequence. We will now introduce the key tool.
Proposition 3.4. Let R be a ring. Let G be a group with an epimor-
phism ϕ : G → Z with kernel K. Suppose that H is a (possibly empty)
tuple of subgroups of G. The following long sequence of RK-modules
is exact.

···    Hn (G, H; RG)     Hn (G, H; RG    d −ϕ )
                                   d ϕ ⊕ RG          Hn (K, Hϕ ; RK)



      Hn+1 (G, H; RG)    ···
Proof. Using the notation of Section 2.3, consider the short exact se-
quence of RG-bimodules
                                d −ϕ →
                         d ϕ ⊕ RG
                                          Y
             0 → RG → RG                     RKti → 0,
                                           i∈Z
where the second map is the diagonal embedding, and the third map
is the difference of the embeddings. If H is empty, then an applica-
tion of Shapiro’s lemma shows that the desired long exact sequence
is just the long exact sequence in cohomology associated to the short
exact sequence above. If H is non-empty, then the long exact sequence
in the statement of the theorem is just the long exact sequence in
Ext•RG (∆G/H , −) associated to the short exact sequence above. This is
because
                                    !
                              RKti ∼
                           Y
            Ext•RG ∆G/H ,              = Ext•RK (∆G/H , RK)
                          i∈Z
by Shapiro’s lemma, and since the restricted RK-module ∆G/H is just
∆K/Hϕ , we have
               Extn (∆G/H , RK) ∼
                  RK             = Hn+1 (K, Hϕ ; RK),
as desired.                                                            □
Remark 3.5. There is a more general long exact sequence that is useful
to study the cohomological dimension of co-abelian subgroups, which
was used in [Fis24b]. Let (G, H) be a group pair, let ϕ : G → R be a
                   Q K. Moreover, let M be any left RK-module.
character with kernel
                                                          ±ϕ
                                                                  The
coinduced module t∈G/K M t has a pair of submodules L consisting
of the sequences (mt t) for which there exists α ∈ R such that mt = 0
for all ±t
         Q< ±α (where the order is taken in R ⊇ G/K). The inclusions
  ±ϕ
L ,→ t∈G/K M t induce a short exact sequence
                                          Y
                0 → N → Lϕ ⊕ L−ϕ →             Mt → 0
                                        t∈G/K

with N being the RG-module induced from M , whence we obtain long
exact sequences in Hn (G; −) and Hn (G, H; −).
           VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                     17

3.3. Reduction to finitely many primes. Suppose that P is a col-
lection of primes. We denote by ZP the ring obtained by localising Z
at the multiplicative set
                    (m                               )
                      Y
                          pi ni | m, ni , ∈ N, pi ∈ P .
                       i=1
A more pedestrian description of ZP is as the subring of Q whose ele-
ments can be expressed as fractions with denominators being products
of powers of primes in P.
   Given a matrix M over QGd ϕ , we say that M involves finitely many
primes if and only if there is a finite set of primes P such that the
                           ϕ
entries of M are all in Z‘
                         PG .

Proposition 3.6. Let G be a group, let φ : G → R be a non-trivial
character, and let C• be a chain complex of finitely generated projective
left ZG-modules without negative terms. If Hi (QG   d ϕ ⊗ZG C• ) = 0 for
all i ⩽ n, then there is a finite collection of primes P such that
                                  ϕ
                               P G ⊗ZG C• ) = 0
                          Hi (Z‘
for all i ⩽ n.
Proof. By taking direct sums with projective modules, we can mod-
ify the chain complex (without changing its homology over arbitrary
coefficients) so that it consists of finitely generated free modules. We
fix bases for the free modules and identify the boundary maps with
matrices over the appropriate rings. We will inductively define chain
contractions
                              d ϕ ⊗ZG Ci → QG
                         si : QG             d ϕ ⊗ZG Ci+1
for i = 0, . . . , n involving finitely many primes.
   We set s−1 to be the zero map, which trivially involves finitely many
primes. For some 0 ⩽ i ⩽ n, suppose we have defined chain con-
tractions s0 , . . . , si−1 involving finitely many primes. By acyclicity of
d ϕ ⊗ZG C• , there is a chain contraction
QG
                        d ϕ ⊗ZG Ci → QG
                   σi : QG           d ϕ ⊗ZG Ci+1 ,
such that ∂i si−1 + σi ∂i+1 = id. We will modify σi to obtain a new
chain contraction involving only finitely many primes. We form σi by
truncating the entries of σi at a real number sufficiently large so that
                         A = id −∂i si−1 − σi ∂i+1
has all entries of positive support. We have A = (σi − σi )∂i+1 , and
σi − σi is a matrix over QG, so the matrix A involves finitely many
                        P ofi the entries of A are positive, id −A is
primes. Since the supports
invertible with inverse ∞  i=0 A . Note that
                       A∂i = (σi − σi )∂i+1 ∂i = 0,
18        SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

so
       id = (id −A)−1 (∂i si−1 + σi ∂i+1 ) = ∂i si−1 + (id −A)−1 σi ∂i+1 .
Thus, we put si = (id −A)−1 σi , and observe that si involves only
finitely many primes. Letting P be the collection of primes involved in
the chain contractions s0 , . . . , sn , we conclude that
                                     ϕ
                                P G ⊗ZG C• ) = 0
                           Hi (Z‘
for i ⩽ n.                                                                   □
Corollary 3.7. Let G be a group of type FPn and let ϕ : G → R be a
non-trivial homomorphism.
                 d ϕ ) = 0 for i ⩽ n, then there is a finite collection of
   (1) If Hi (G; QG
                                            ϕ
         primes P such that Hi (G; Z‘
                                    P G ) = 0.
     (2) If cd(G) = n and there is an integer 0 ⩽ j ⩽ n such that
                                      dϕ) = 0
                               Hi (G; QG
         for j ⩽ i ⩽ n, then there is a finite collection of primes P such
                         ϕ
         that Hi (G; Z‘
                      P G ) = 0 for j ⩽ i ⩽ n.

Proof. Item (1) is an immediate consequence of Proposition 3.6. In the
situation of item (2), there is a resolution 0 → Pn → · · · → P0 → Z → 0
by finitely generated projective ZG-modules. The Novikov cohomology
of G is
                      d ϕ ) = Hi (HomZG (P• , ZG) ⊗ZG RG
               Hi (G; RG                               dϕ)
for any ring R, because the modules Pi are finitely generated. The
result then follows by applying Proposition 3.6 to the chain complex
             · · · → HomZG (Pn−1 , ZG) → HomZG (Pn , ZG) → 0
of finitely generated projective ZG-modules.                                 □

                       4. Acyclicity at infinity
 We will now apply the tools from the previous section to study ho-
mology at infinity of algebraic fibres.
Theorem 4.1. Let R be a ring. Let G be a group and ϕ : G → Z an
epimorphism. If K = ker ϕ is of type FPn (R) then
                   Hi+1 (G; RG) ∼ = Hi (K; RK)
as RK-modules for all i < n and Hn (K; RK) is isomorphic as an
RK-module to a submodule of Hn+1 (G; RG).
Proof. This follows immediately from Corollary 3.3 and Proposition 3.4,
taking H = ∅ and noting that
           Hi (G; RG    d −ϕ ) = Hi (G; RG
                  d ϕ ⊕ RG                             d −ϕ ).
                                        d ϕ ) ⊕ Hi (G; RG                    □
           VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                     19

Remark 4.2. While we find the approach using Novikov rings more
straightforward, there is also a spectral sequence argument, which we
sketch here. The Lyndon–Hochschild–Serre spectral sequence associ-
ated to the extension 1 → K → G → Z → 1 is
               E2p,q = Hp (Z; Hq (K; RG)) ⇒ Hp+q (G; RG).
Because K is of type FPn (R), we have

        Hq (K; RG) ∼              RKti ) ∼
                              M            M
                     = Hq (K;            =   Hq (K; RK)ti
                                 i∈Z            i∈Z

for all q ⩽ n. Thus,
   H0 (Z; Hq (K; RG)) = 0 and          H1 (Z; Hq (K; RG)) ∼
                                                          = Hq (K; RK)
for 0 ⩽ q ⩽ n by an easy cohomology computation. The page E2p,q is
concentrated in the columns 0 and 1, so it follows immediately that
Hq (K; RK) ∼
           = Hq+1 (G; RG) for q < n and that
                       Hn (K; RK) ⩽ Hn+1 (G; RG).
Corollary 4.3. Let K be a field. Let G be a group with H2 (G; KG) = 0.
If ϕ : G → Z is an epimorphism with finitely generated kernel, then
ker ϕ has at most one end.
Proof. Since ker ϕ is finitely generated, it is of type FP1 (K). Hence
H1 (ker ϕ; K ker ϕ) = 0. By [Swa69, Lemma 3.5], this statement being
true for one field implies it being true for all fields, and in particular
for the field of two elements F2 . Finally, H1 (ker ϕ; F2 ker ϕ) = 0 implies
that ker ϕ has at most one end – this is due to Specker [Spe49].          □
Corollary E. Let M be a closed aspherical manifold of dimension at
least three. If ϕ : π1 (M ) → Z is an epimorphism with finitely generated
kernel, then the kernel has only one end.
Proof. The fact that H2 (π1 (M ); Qπ1 (M )) = 0 follows directly from
Poincaré duality and the fact that Hi (π1 (M ); Qπ1 (M )) = 0 for all
i > 0, which follows from Shapiro’s lemma.
   We conclude that ker ϕ has at most one end. If it had zero ends,
it would be finite, but π1 M is torsion free, and hence ker ϕ would
be trivial, forcing π1 M ∼
                         = Z. But this implies that the cohomological
dimension of π1 M is one, contradicting the existence of the fundamental
class of M .                                                          □

   This confirms the intuition of Douba, expressed after the statement
of [Dou24, Theorem 1], that his Zariski-dense subgroup of SL5 (Z) that
is finitely generated but not finitely presented has one end – the sub-
group arises precisely as a kernel of an epimorphism ϕ : π1 (M ) → Z
where M is a closed four-dimensional hyperbolic manifold.
20      SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

Remark 4.4. A natural source of examples of groups with
                             H2 (G; KG) = 0,
with K being a field, is provided by the class of duality groups. A group
G of type FP is an n-dimensional duality group if Hi (G; ZG) = 0 for all
i ̸= n and Hn (G; ZG) is torsion-free as a Z-module. Examples of dual-
ity groups include Poincaré-duality groups, and therefore fundamental
group of closed aspherical manifolds, but they also include the torsion-
free finite-index subgroups of arithmetic groups [BS73], mapping class
groups [Har86], and outer automorphism groups of free groups [BF00].
Note also that if (G, H) is a Poincaré-duality pair of dimension at least
4 over some field K, then H2 (G; KG) vanishes. Thus, algebraic fibres
in any of the groups listed above are one-ended.

                  5. Virtual algebraic fibring
5.1. RFRS groups. We now give a sharpening of Theorem 2.14 which
holds for group pairs.
Proposition 5.1. Let G be a RFRS group of type FPn (K) for some
field K and let H be a (possibly empty) finite tuple of subgroups of G,
where each H ∈ H is of type FPn (K). If
                       (2)             (2)
                      βi (G; K) = βi (H; K) = 0
for all i ⩽ n and each H ∈ H, then there is a finite-index normal
subgroup G0 ⩽ G and an antipodally symmetric open set U ⊆ S(G0 ),
                                                       ˚ ⊇ S(G) and
invariant under the conjugation action of G, such that U
                              ϕ
                  Hi (G0 ; KG            d ϕ|H ) = 0
                           ‘0 ) = Hi (H; KH

for all i ⩽ n, H ∈ HG0 , and ϕ ∈ U .
Proof. We pick a free resolution of the trivial KG-module K in which
the modules up to degree n are finitely generated, and endow the free
modules with bases; we pick analogous resolutions for every group
H ∈ H. Since the homologies of the groups G and H over DKG
and DKH , respectively, vanish up to degree n, we may build partial
chain contractions witnessing this vanishing. Each such partial chain
contraction consists of n + 1 finite matrices over DKG , since DKH is nat-
urally a sub-skew-field of DKG ; since H is finite, altogether this gives
finitely many finite matrices over DKG . By Theorem 2.14, there exists
a finite-index normal subgroup G0 of G and an antipodally symmetric
open set U ⊆ S(G0 ) such that all of the entries of the matrices lie over
              U
(DKG0 ∩ KG ‘0 )G/G0 . Moreover, U    ˚ ⊇ S(G) and U is invariant under
the conjugation action of G on S(G0 ).
               VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                    21

                                                                       ϕ
      We take a map ϕ : G0 → R from U , and obtain Hi (G0 ; KG
                                                            ‘0 ) = 0
   for every i ⩽ n, and
                                                 ϕ
                          Hi (G0 ∩ g −1 Hg; KG
                                            ‘0 ) = 0
   for every H ∈ H, g ∈ G, and i ⩽ n (the fact that we may conjugate H
                                                             ϕ
   comes from conjugacy-invariance of U ). Hence, Hi (H; KG
                                                         ‘0 ) = 0 for
                                                        d ϕ|H ) = 0
   every i ⩽ n and every H ∈ HG0 . By Lemma 2.1, Hi (H; KH
   for every i ⩽ n and every H ∈ HG0 .                           □
      Since we are interested in both virtual algebraic fibring over a specific
   field, and over all fields simultaneously, for notational convenience let
   us consider a set K of fields with a specific property.
   Definition 5.2. We say that a set of fields K is small if K is finite or
   if it contains Q and for every prime p it contains only finitely many
   fields of characteristic p.
      If K is finite, we will say that a group is of type FPn (K) if it is of
   type FPn (K) for every K ∈ K; similarly, we define PDnK to mean PDnK
   for every K ∈ K.
      When K is infinite, we will say that a group is of type FPn (K) if it is
   of type FPn ; similarly, we define PDnK to mean PDn .
   Theorem 5.3. Let K be a small set of fields. Let G be a RFRS group
   of type FPn (K), and let H be a possibly empty finite tuple of subgroups
   of G, all of type FPm (K). The following are equivalent:
       (1) There exists a finite-index subgroup G0 of G and an epimor-
           phism ϕ : G0 → Z that does not vanish on any of the subgroups
           in HG0 , such that for all K ∈ K the group ker ϕ is of type
           FPn (K), and ker ϕ|H ′ is of type FPm (K) for every H ′ ∈ HG0 ;
                       (2)
       (2) We have βi (G; K) = 0 for all i ⩽ n and all K ∈ K, and
             (2)
           βi (H; K) = 0 for all i ⩽ m, all K ∈ K, and all H ∈ H.
   Proof. We will prove both implications in turn.
(1) ⇒ (2) This follows immediately from Theorem 2.13 and Lemma 2.12.
(2) ⇒ (1) We first suppose that K is infinite, and so Q ∈ K. By Theo-
          rem 2.4 and Proposition 5.1, there exists a finite-index subgroup
          G0 ⩽ G and an epimorphism ϕ : G0 → Z such that ker ϕ is of
          type FPn (Q) and ker ϕ|H is of type FPm (Q) for every H ∈ HG0 .
            Applying Proposition 3.6 to G0 and each group in HG0 in
          turn for ϕ and −ϕ, and then using Theorem 2.4, there exists
          a finite collection of primes P such that all the kernels above
          are of type FPn (ZP ) or FPm (ZP ), respectively, and hence of type
          FPn (Fp ) or FPm (Fp ) for all primes not in P, since there is a ring
          epimorphism ZP → Fp for all primes p ∈        / P. (It is precisely
          Proposition 3.6 that forces us to assume that G is of type FPn
          and every H ∈ H is of type FPm .)
22      SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

          Being of type FPn (Fp ) or FPm (Fp ), the kernels are automati-
       cally of type FPn (K) or FPm (K), respectively, for every field K
       of characteristic p. Similarly, being of type FPn (Q) or FPm (Q)
       takes care of all fields of characteristic 0.
          Let L be the subset of K consisting of the fields of charac-
       teristics lying in P. Since K is small, the set L is finite. Our
       goal now is to show that, up to passing to a further finite-index
       subgroup, we may arrange for our kernels to also be of type
       FPn (K) or FPm (K) for every field K ∈ L. If K were finite, then
       we would have been in this situation to start with, by taking
       any ϕ and L = K. Hence, from now on we may ignore the case
       distinction of whether K is infinite.
          Take L ∈ L. Note that each H ∈ HG0 is commensurable
                                        (2)
       to some subgroup in H, so βi (H; K) = 0 for each K ∈ K
       and i ⩽ m. By Proposition 5.1, there is a finite-index normal
       subgroup G1 of G0 and an open set V ⊆ S(G1 ) such that
                               ψ
                 Hi (G1 ; LG            d ψ|H ) = 0
                          ‘1 ) = Hj (H; LH
       for all i ⩽ n, j ⩽ m, ψ ∈ V , and H ∈ HG1 . Moreover,
       ˚ ⊇ S(G ) and V is invariant under the conjugation action
       V          0
       of G0 on S(G1 ) and under the antipodal map.
          Since vanishing of Novikov homology is an open property for
       characters, there exists an antipodally symmetric open set W
       in S(G1 ) containing ϕ|G1 such that for every ψ ∈ W we have
                               ψ
                 Hi (G1 ; KG            d ψ|H ) = 0
                          ‘1 ) = Hj (H; KH
       for every i ⩽ n, j ⩽ m, H ∈ HG1 , and K ∈ K ∖ L. We easily
       arrange for W to be invariant under the action of G0 on S(G1 ),
       since this action factors through the finite group G0 /G1 ; we also
       easily arrange for W to be invariant under the antipodal map.
       Fix an integral character ψ ∈ W ∩ V . We obtain
                              ±ψ                   ±ψ|H
                Hi (G1 ; LG
                         ‘1        ) = Hj (H; LH
                                              d           )=0
       for every i ⩽ n, j ⩽ m, and H ∈ HG1 ; we also have ψ not
       vanishing on the groups H. Hence, by passing to a deeper
       finite-index subgroup G1 , replacing HG0 by a potentially more
       numerous, but still finite, tuple HG1 , and replacing ϕ by ψ, we
       have guaranteed that all the relevant kernels are of type FPn (K)
       or FPm (K) for all fields K ∈ K ∖ L, and for the field L. Since
       L is finite, repeating this process finitely many times yields the
       desired finite-index subgroup and homomorphism.                 □
  The arguments above also show the following: if G is a RFRS group
                                   (2)
of type FP with cd(G) = n and βn (G; K) = 0 for all fields K in a
small set of fields K, then there is a finite-index subgroup G0 ⩽ G
           VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                  23

                                                         ±ϕ
and an epimorphism ϕ : G0 → Z such that Hn (G0 ; KG‘0 ) = 0 for all
K ∈ K. This uses Corollary 3.7(2) (see also [Fis24b, Proposition 3.2]).
Applying [Fis24b, Theorem 3.5] yields the following corollary.
Corollary 5.4. Let G be a RFRS group of type FP and suppose that
cd(G) = n.
           (2)
   (1) If βn (G; K) = 0 for all fields K in some small set of fields
       K, then there exists a subgroup G0 ⩽ G of finite index and an
       epimorphism ϕ : G0 → Z such that cdK (ker ϕ) = n − 1 for all
       K ∈ K.
           (2)
   (2) If βn (G; K) = 0 for all prime fields K, then there exists a sub-
       group G0 ⩽ G of finite index and an epimorphism ϕ : G0 → Z
       such that cdK (ker ϕ) = n − 1 for all fields K.
5.2. Poincaré-duality groups. In this section we will work with ori-
entable Poincaré-duality pairs (G, H). Recall that we allow H = ∅, in
which case by our convention we are dealing with an orientable Poincaré
duality group G. Again, we will insist on R being a commutative ring
in this subsection.
Lemma 5.5. Let (G, H) be an orientable PDnR -pair, and let ϕ : G → Z
be a non-trivial homomorphism. If ker ϕ is of type FP⌊n/2⌋ (R), and
ker ϕ|H is a proper subgroup of H of type FP⌊(n−1)/2⌋ (R) for each H ∈ H,
then
                           d ±ϕ ) = Hi (G; RG
                    Hi (G; RG              d ±ϕ ) = 0
for all i.
Proof. By Corollary 3.3, the fact that ker ϕ is of type FP⌊n/2⌋ (R) is
equivalent to
                        d ±ϕ ) = Hi (G; RG
                 Hi (G; RG              d ±ϕ ) = 0
for all i ⩽ ⌊n/2⌋. Poincaré duality of (G, H) gives
                                    d ±ϕ ) = 0
                          Hi (G, H; RG
for all i ⩾ n − ⌊n/2⌋ = ⌈n/2⌉, see Remark 2.10.
   At this point we split the proof into two cases. First, suppose that
H = ∅. Since the homology of the pair (G, H) coincides with the
homology of G in this case, we have established that
                                  d ±ϕ ) = 0
                           Hi (G; RG
for all i. The cohomology statement follows from Corollary 3.2, or from
Remark 2.10.
   Now suppose that H ̸= ∅. Since every H ∈ H is itself an orientable
PDn−1
    R -group by Proposition 2.9, we may apply the previous case and
conclude that
                                d ±ϕ|H ) = 0
                         Hi (H; RH
24      SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

for every H ∈ H and every i (we are using the fact that ϕ|H is non-
trivial here).
                        d ±ϕ ) = 0 for all H ∈ H and every i as
   We claim that Hi (H; RG
well. Indeed, the vanishing of Hi (H; RH   d ±ϕ|H ) for all i is witnessed
by chain contractions, which can be viewed as matrices with entries in
d ±ϕ|H . But RH
RH              d ±ϕ|H ⩽ RG d ±ϕ , so the same chain contractions witness
                         d ±ϕ ) for all i.
the vanishing of Hi (H; RG
   The long exact homology sequence for the pair (G, H) now tells us
that
                            d ±ϕ ) ∼
                     Hi (G; RG                  d ±ϕ )
                                    = Hi (G, H; RG
for all i, and hence both are zero. The vanishing of Novikov cohomology
follows from Corollary 3.2.                                             □
   When H = ∅ and R = Z, the following result is a special case
of a theorem of Hillman–Kochloukova [HK07, Corollary 6.1]; see also
[Bie81, Theorem 9.11]. Both Hillman–Kochloukova and Bieri use spec-
tral sequences, whereas our proof avoids that, making use of Novikov
rings instead.
Theorem 5.6. Let (G, H) be an orientable Poincaré-duality pair over
R in dimension n with a non-trivial homomorphism ϕ : G → Z that
does not vanish on any of the subgroups in H. If ker ϕ is of type
FP⌊n/2⌋ (R) and ker ϕ|H is of type FP⌊(n−1)/2⌋ (R) for every H ∈ H, then
(ker ϕ, Hϕ ) is an orientable Poincaré-duality pair over R in dimension
n − 1.
Proof. The combination of Lemma 5.5, Poincaré duality, and Proposi-
tion 3.4 immediately gives an isomorphism of R ker ϕ-modules
                                             
     i                      ∼  i+1         ∼    R if i = n − 1,
    H (ker ϕ, Hϕ ; R ker ϕ) = H (G, H; RG) =
                                                0 otherwise.
  Combining the vanishing of Novikov homology that we obtained in
Lemma 5.5 with Theorem 2.4 immediately yields that ker ϕ is of type
FP∞ (R). Since G is of finite cohomological dimension over R, so is
ker ϕ, and therefore ker ϕ is of type FP(R) by a suitable adaptation of
[Bro82, Proposition VIII.6.1] from Z to R.
  We split the proof into two cases. First, if H = ∅, then the above
facts tell us immediately that ker ϕ is an orientable Poincaré-duality
group over R in dimension n − 1.
  Now let us suppose that H ̸= ∅. Since every H ∈ H is an orientable
PDn−1
    R -group by Proposition 2.9, we may apply the previous case and
conclude that Hϕ consists solely of orientable PDn−2
                                                  R -groups. Hence for
every H ′ ∈ Hϕ we have
                                            R ker ϕ/H ′ if i = n − 2,
                                          
                 ∼                    ′ ∼
                    M
  i   ′                     i   ′
 H (H ; R ker ϕ) =         H (H ; RH ) =
                         ′
                                                 0        otherwise.
                   ker ϕ/H
              VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                    25

   The long exact cohomology sequence for the pair (ker ϕ, Hϕ ) now tells
   us that
                                   
                                     ∆ker ϕ/Hϕ if i = n − 2,
              H (ker ϕ; R ker ϕ) ∼
               i
                                 =
                                        0      otherwise,
   as required – note that we had to change a direct product over Hϕ to
   a direct sum. This is possible since Hϕ is finite, as ϕ does not vanish
   on any of the groups in H, and as H is finite by Proposition 2.9.    □
     Hillman–Kochloukova offer a similar result [HK07, Corollary 6.1]
   when R = Z and H = ∅, where they only require ker ϕ to be of type
   FP⌊(n−1)/2⌋ (R), and additionally ask for the Euler characteristic of G to
   be zero. In fact, it is not difficult to see that the additional assumption
                                                                 ±ϕ
   χ(G) = 0 is equivalent to requiring that H⌊m/2⌋ (G; ZG    ” ) = 0 using
                    ±ϕ
   the fact that ZG
                 ” is von Neumann finite by [Koc06] (see the proof of
   [HK07, Theorem 6]). Note that we will only use the stated version of
   Theorem 5.6 in our proof of Theorem 5.7 below.
   Theorem 5.7. Let K be a small set of fields. Let (G, H) be an ori-
   entable PDnK -pair, and suppose that G is RFRS. The following are
   equivalent:
      (1) There exists a finite-index subgroup G0 ⩽ G and an epimor-
           phism ϕ : G0 → Z that does not vanish on any of the groups in
                                                              n−1
           HG0 such that (ker ϕ, (HG0 )ϕ ) is an orientable PDK   -pair for
           every K ∈ K.
                      (2)
      (2) We have βi (G; K) = 0 for all i and all K ∈ K.
                      (2)
      (3) We have βi (G; K) = 0 for all i ⩽ ⌊n/2⌋ and all K ∈ K, and
            (2)
           βi (H; K) = 0 for all i ⩽ ⌊(n − 1)/2⌋, K ∈ K, and H ∈ H.
    Proof. We will prove a cycle of implications.
(1) ⇒ (2) In this case, G virtually algebraically fibres with kernel of type
           FP(K) for all K ∈ K, so item (2) follows by Theorem 2.13
           and Lemma 2.12.
 (2) ⇒(3) The assumption implies that Hi (G, H; DKG ) = 0 for all i by
           Poincaré duality. The vanishing of homology of G with coeffi-
           cients in DKG gives the vanishing of cohomology, for example
           using chain contractions. The long exact sequence of Proposi-
           tion 2.7 now gives vanishing of the cohomology of H with coef-
           ficients in DKG . Since DKG contains DKH , and since skew-fields
           are flat over one another, this gives vanishing of the cohomology
           of H with coefficients in DKH . Poincaré duality of H now gives
             (2)
           βi (H; K) = 0 for all i and all K, showing that item (3) holds.
 (3)⇒ (1) By Proposition 2.9, the tuple H is finite, and it consists of
           groups of type FP(K). Theorem 5.3 gives us a finite-index
           subgroup G0 and an epimorphism ϕ : G0 → Z that does not
           vanish on any of the subgroups in HG0 , such that ker ϕ is of
26      SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

       type FP⌊n/2⌋ (K), and ker ϕ|H ′ is of type FP⌊(n−1)/2⌋ (K) for every
       H ′ ∈ HG0 and every K ∈ K. Also, (G0 , HG0 ) is an orientable
       PDnK -pair for every K ∈ K; indeed, the cohomology of G0 with
       coefficients in KG0 behaves as required by Shapiro’s lemma,
       and G0 is of type FP(K), being a finite-index subgroup of G.
       Now Theorem 5.6 finishes the argument.                            □
   Taking H = ∅ and K to be a single field immediately implies our
first main result.
Theorem A. Let K be a field and G be a RFRS orientable Poincaré-
duality group of dimension n > 0 over K. The following are equivalent:
   (1) There exists a finite-index subgroup G0 in G and an epimor-
        phism ϕ : G0 → Z such that ker ϕ is an orientable Poincaré-
        duality group of dimension n − 1 over K;
                                  (2)
   (2) For every i ⩽ n we have βi (G; K) = 0.
   Being a Poincaré-duality group over a prime field immediately im-
plies being a Poincaré-duality group over all fields of the same charac-
teristic [DD89, Proposition V.3.7].
   Taking H = ∅ and K to be the set of prime fields yields the version
that deals with all fields simultaneously.
Theorem B. Let G be a RFRS orientable Poincaré-duality group of
dimension n > 0. The following are equivalent:
   (1) There exists a finite-index subgroup G0 in G and an epimor-
       phism ϕ : G0 → Z such that ker ϕ is an orientable Poincaré-
       duality group of dimension n − 1 over all fields;
                                                       (2)
   (2) For all i ⩽ n and all prime fields K, we have βi (G; K) = 0.
5.3. Low dimensions. In dimension three, Theorem 5.7 can give a
topological conclusion.
Theorem 5.8. Let (G, H) be a PD3 -pair and suppose that G is RFRS.
The following are equivalent:
   (1) There exists a finite-index subgroup G0 ⩽ G such that G0 is the
       fundamental group of a fibred three-manifold, and HG0 is the
       collection of fundamental groups of the boundary components of
       the manifold;
                   (2)
   (2) We have β1 (G; Q) = 0.
Sketch proof. Fibred three-manifolds have vanishing first L2 -Betti num-
bers, so it is clear that item (1) implies item (2). Thus, we focus on
the converse implication.
       (2)
  If β1 (G; Q) = 0, then H2 (G, H; DQG ) = 0 by Poincaré duality.
Moreover, the groups H ∈ H are all PD2 groups. This implies that
H2 (H; DQG ) vanishes for all H ∈ H. The long exact sequence of
                                      (2)
Proposition 2.7 then implies that β2 (G; Q) = 0, since vanishing of
           VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                  27

L2 -homology in a degree is equivalent to the vanishing of the L2 -
                                             (2)
cohomology in the same degree; hence βi (G; Q) = 0 for all i. By
Theorem 5.7, there exists a finite-index subgroup G0 ⩽ G and an epi-
morphism ϕ : G0 → Z with (ker ϕ, (HG0 )ϕ ) being an orientable PD2Q -
pair.
   Every such pair is geometric by [DD89, Theorem V.10.2] if H ̸= ∅.
If H = ∅, then by a result of Bowditch [Bow04] we know that ker ϕ is
virtually the fundamental group of a closed orientable surface of genus
at least one; using the Nielsen realisation theorem, we obtain that ker ϕ
itself is the fundamental group of a closed orientable surface of genus
at least one.
   In either event, ker ϕ is a surface group, and if H =  ̸ ∅ then the
surface has boundary and the action of Z = im ϕ on ker ϕ preserves the
peripheral structure which is encoded in (HG0 )ϕ .
   Orientable surface-by-Z groups are always realised as fundamental
groups of fibred 3-manifolds [Nie27,ZVC80], and therefore G is virtually
a 3-manifold group. The details of this argument can be found in
[BKK25].                                                               □

  We also offer the following result in dimension four, where we can
conclude that the kernel of the virtual algebraic fibration is in fact a
Poincaré-duality group over Z.

Theorem 5.9. Let (G, H) be a PD4 -pair and suppose that G is RFRS.
The following are equivalent:
   (1) There exist a finite-index subgroup G0 ⩽ G and an epimorphism
       ϕ : G0 → Z that does not vanish on any of the groups in HG0
       such that (ker ϕ, (HG0 )ϕ ) is an orientable PD3 -pair.
                  (2)            (2)
   (2) We have β1 (G; Q) = β2 (G; Q) = 0.

Proof. Item (1) implies item (2) by Theorem 2.13 and Lemma 2.12,
noting that the group ker ϕ and the groups in (HG0 )ϕ are all of type FP
– for the latter groups this follows from Proposition 2.9.
   We now focus on the converse implication. By potentially passing to
an index-two subgroup, we may assume that (G, H) is orientable. The
group G is of cohomological dimension 3 or 4 (depending on whether
H=  ̸ ∅), and so it is infinite. Similarly, the groups in H are all PD3 -
groups by Proposition 2.9, and so they are also of cohomological di-
                                                      (2)
mension 3, and thus infinite. We conclude that β0 (G; Q) = 0 and
  (2)
β0 (H; Q) = 0 for every H ∈ H, see [Lüc02, Theorem 6.54(8)(b)].
                    (2)
   We claim that β1 (H; Q) = 0 for all H ∈ H. Indeed, the long exact
sequence of Proposition 2.7 gives an isomorphism

                        H1 (H; DQG ) ∼
                    Y
                                     = H2 (G, H; DQG ).
                  H∈H
28       SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

But H2 (G, H; DQG ) ∼= H2 (G; DQG ) = 0 by Poincaré duality and by as-
sumption, proving that H1 (H; DQG ) = 0 for every H ∈ H. Since DQG is
a flat DQH -module, as both are skew-fields, we obtain H1 (H; DQH ) = 0
for every H ∈ H. Finally, vanishing of L2 -homology and L2 -cohomology
                                           (2)
in a given degree is equivalent, and so β1 (H; Q) = 0 for all H ∈ H,
as claimed.
   By Theorem 5.3 with K = {Q}, n = 2, and m = 1, there is a finite-
index subgroup G0 ⩽ G and an epimorphism φ : G0 → Z that does not
vanish on any of the groups in HG0 such that ker ϕ is of type FP2 (Q),
and ker ϕ|H is of type FP1 (Q) for every H ∈ HG0 .
   Being of type FP1 (Q) is equivalent to being finitely generated, which
is in turn the same as being of type FP1 . Applying Theorem 2.4 now
yields
                           ±ϕ
             Hi (G0 ; ZG
                      ‘0        ) = 0 and               d ±ϕ|H ) = 0
                                                 Hi (H; ZH
for all H ∈ HG0 and i ∈ {0, 1}. By Theorems 2.4 and 5.6, it is therefore
enough to prove that
                                            ±ϕ
                            H2 (G0 ; ZG
                                     ‘0          ) = 0.
Using Poincaré duality, this is equivalent to showing that
                                                 ±ϕ
                       H2 (G0 , HG0 ; ZG
                                      ‘0              ) = 0,
which we will now do.
  The portion of the long exact sequences in homology associated to
the pair (G0 , HG0 )
                ±ϕ                   ±ϕ      M              ±ϕ
             ‘0 ) → H1 (G0 , HG ; ZG
    H1 (G0 ; ZG                   ‘0 ) →         H0 (H; ZG
                                                        ‘0 )
                               0
                                                          H∈HG0

                                  ±ϕ
shows that H1 (G0 , HG0 ; ZG
                          ‘0   ) = 0. Similarly, the portion
                 ±ϕ                     ±ϕ      M               ±ϕ
              ‘0 ) → H2 (G0 , HG ; QG
     H2 (G0 ; QG                   ‘0 ) →             H1 (H; QG
                                                             ‘0 )
                                 0
                                                          H∈HG0

                                   ±ϕ                              ±ϕ
shows that H2 (G0 , HG0 ; QG‘0 ) = 0, since H2 (G0 ; QG ‘0 ) = 0 by
Theorem 2.4.
   Suppose that HG0 ̸= ∅. The pair (G0 , HG0 ) is a PD4 -pair, and hence
is of type FP, which means precisely that ∆G0 /HG0 defined over Z admits
a finite resolution by finitely generated projective ZG0 -modules. Thus,
fix a resolution
                 · · · → C2 → C1 → C0 → ∆G0 /HG0 → 0
of ∆G0 /HG0 by finitely generated free ZG0 -modules (passing from pro-
jective to free modules potentially makes this resolution infinite in
            VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                           29

length). The previous paragraph implies that there is a partial chain
contraction
                    ±ϕ                    ±ϕ
          si : QG
               ‘0        ⊗ZG0 Ci → QG
                                   ‘0          ⊗ZG0 Ci+1 ,       i ∈ {0, 1},
                               ±ϕ
                     ‘0 ⊗ZG C• . Moreover, viewed as a matrix
of the chain complex QG        0
         ±ϕ
over QG0 , the chain contraction s0 can be chosen to have entries in
     ‘
    ±ϕ
‘0 . (Here, we are really carrying out two arguments, one for ϕ and
ZG
one for −ϕ; we use ±ϕ for convenience.)
                   ±ϕ
  Let z : C1 → ZG
               ‘0 be a 1-cocycle, and consider its extension
                                  ±ϕ                    ±ϕ
                         z : QG
                             ‘0        ⊗ZG0 C1 → QG
                                                 ‘0          .
Then z = (∂1 s0 + s1 ∂2 )z = ∂1 s0 z. Restricting both sides to C1 , we see
                                                           ±ϕ
that z is the coboundary of the cochain s0 z : C0 → ZG ‘0 . Hence,
                              ±ϕ                                  ±ϕ
          H2 (G0 , HG0 ; ZG
                         ‘0        ) = Ext1ZG0 (∆G0 /HG0 ; ZG
                                                           ‘0          ) = 0,
as desired.
   When HG0 = ∅, the argument is completely analogous with the
trivial ZG-module Z used instead of ∆G0 /HG0 , and with indices of the
chain contractions increased by one.                                □
   Restricting to the case H = ∅, we obtain the statement advertised
in the introduction.
Corollary C. Let G be a RFRS Poincaré-duality group in dimension
four. The following are equivalent:
   (1) There exists a finite-index subgroup G0 ⩽ G and an epimor-
       phism ϕ : G0 → Z such that ker ϕ is an orientable Poincaré-
       duality group of dimension three;
                  (2)          (2)
   (2) We have β1 (G; Q) = β2 (G; Q) = 0.

                                   References
 [Ago08] I. Agol, Criteria for virtual fibering, J. Topol. 1 (2008), no. 2, 269–284.
          MR2399130 (2009b:57033)
 [Ago13]         , The virtual Haken conjecture, Doc. Math. 18 (2013), 1045–
          1087. With an appendix by Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Manning.
          MR3104553
  [BE78] R. Bieri and B. Eckmann, Relative homology and Poincaré duality for
          group pairs, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 13 (1978), no. 3, 277–319. MR509165
  [BF00] M. Bestvina and M. Feighn, The topology at infinity of Out(Fn ), Invent.
          Math. 140 (2000), no. 3, 651–692. MR1760754
  [Bie07] R. Bieri, Deficiency and the geometric invariants of a group, J. Pure
          Appl. Algebra 208 (2007), no. 3, 951–959. With an appendix by Pascal
          Schweitzer. MR2283437
  [Bie72]        , Gruppen mit Poincaré-Dualität, Comment. Math. Helv. 47
          (1972), 373–396. MR352290
30          SAM P. FISHER, GIOVANNI ITALIANO, AND DAWID KIELAK

  [Bie81]            , Homological dimension of discrete groups, Second, Queen Mary
             College Mathematical Notes, Queen Mary College, Department of Pure
             Mathematics, London, 1981. MR715779
[BKK25] M. R. Bridson, D. Kielak, and M. Kudlinska, Stallings’s fibring theorem
             and PD3 -pairs, Topology at infinity of discrete groups, 2025, pp. 125–132.
             MR4861506
    [BL12] A. Bartels and W. Lück, The Borel Conjecture for hyperbolic and CAT(0)-
             groups, Annals of Mathematics 175 (2012), no. 2, 631–689. MR2993750
 [BNS87] R. Bieri, W. D. Neumann, and R. Strebel, A geometric invariant of
             discrete groups, Invent. Math. 90 (1987), no. 3, 451–477. MR914846
             (89b:20108)
 [Bow04] B. H. Bowditch, Planar groups and the Seifert conjecture, J. Reine Angew.
             Math. 576 (2004), 11–62. MR2099199
    [BR88] R. Bieri and B. Renz, Valuations on free resolutions and higher geometric
             invariants of groups, Comment. Math. Helv. 63 (1988), no. 3, 464–497.
             MR960770
   [Bro82] K. S. Brown, Cohomology of groups, Graduate Texts in Mathematics,
             vol. 87, Springer-Verlag, New York-Berlin, 1982. MR672956
     [BS73] A. Borel and J.-P. Serre, Corners and arithmetic groups, Comment. Math.
             Helv. 48 (1973), 436–491. MR387495
  [BW12] N. Bergeron and D. T. Wise, A boundary criterion for cubulation, Amer.
             J. Math. 134 (2012), no. 3, 843–859. MR2931226
     [CS84] M. Culler and P. B. Shalen, Bounded, separating, incompressible surfaces
             in knot manifolds, Invent. Math. 75 (1984), no. 3, 537–545. MR735339
   [DD89] W. Dicks and M. J. Dunwoody, Groups acting on graphs, Cambridge
             Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 17, Cambridge University Press,
             Cambridge, 1989. MR1001965
  [Dou24] S. Douba, A novel witness to incoherence of SL5 (Z), Proc. Amer. Math.
             Soc. 152 (2024), no. 4, 1451–1455. MR4709217
    [Far67] F. T. Farrell, The obstruction to fibering a manifold over a circle,
             ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 1967. Thesis (Ph.D.)–Yale University.
             MR2616856
  [Fis24a] S. P. Fisher, Improved algebraic fibrings, Compos. Math. 160 (2024),
             no. 9, 2203–2227. MR4797112
 [Fis24b]            , On the cohomological dimension of kernels of maps to Z (Mar.
             2024), available at arXiv:2403.18758.
    [FK24] S. P. Fisher and K. Klinge, Dimension drop in residual chains (Oct. 2024),
             available at arXiv:2410.08153.
  [Gab02] D. Gaboriau, Invariants l2 de relations d’équivalence et de groupes, Publ.
             Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. 95 (2002), 93–150. MR1953191
   [Har86] J. L. Harer, The virtual cohomological dimension of the mapping class
             group of an orientable surface, Invent. Math. 84 (1986), no. 1, 157–176.
             MR830043
   [HK07] J. A. Hillman and D. H. Kochloukova, Finiteness conditions and PDr -
             group covers of PDn -complexes, Math. Z. 256 (2007), no. 1, 45–56.
             MR2282258
  [Hug70] I. Hughes, Division rings of fractions for group rings, Comm. Pure Appl.
             Math. 23 (1970), 181–188. MR0263934 (41 #8533)
  [HW08] F. Haglund and D. T. Wise, Special cube complexes, Geom. Funct. Anal.
             17 (2008), no. 5, 1551–1620. MR2377497 (2009a:20061)
      [JZ21] A. Jaikin-Zapirain, The universality of Hughes-free division rings, Selecta
             Mathematica. New Series 27 (2021), no. 4, Paper No. 74, 33. MR4292784
            VIRTUAL FIBRING OF POINCARÉ-DUALITY GROUPS                             31

  [Kie20] D. Kielak, Residually finite rationally solvable groups and virtual fibring,
            J. Amer. Math. Soc. 33 (2020), no. 2, 451–486. MR4073866
 [KM12] J. Kahn and V. Markovic, Immersing almost geodesic surfaces in a closed
            hyperbolic three manifold, Ann. of Math. (2) 175 (2012), no. 3, 1127–1190.
            MR2912704
 [Koc06] D. H. Kochloukova, Some Novikov rings that are von Neumann finite
            and knot-like groups, Comment. Math. Helv. 81 (2006), no. 4, 931–943.
            MR2271229
  [Lüc94] W. Lück, L2 -Betti numbers of mapping tori and groups, Topology 33
            (1994), no. 2, 203–214. MR1273782
   [Lin93] P. A. Linnell, Division rings and group von Neumann algebras, Forum
            Math. 5 (1993), no. 6, 561–576. MR1242889
  [Lüc02] W. Lück, L2 -invariants: theory and applications to geometry and K-
            theory, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge. A
            Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics [Results in Mathematics and
            Related Areas. 3rd Series. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics],
            vol. 44, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002. MR1926649 (2003m:58033)
   [Nie27] J. Nielsen, Untersuchungen zur Topologie der geschlossenen zweiseitigen
            Flächen, Acta Math. 50 (1927), no. 1, 189–358. MR1555256
   [OS25] B. Okun and K. Schreve, Orders and fibering, Groups, Geometry, and
            Dynamics (Feb. 2025).
 [Ran95] A. Ranicki, Finite domination and Novikov rings, Topology 34 (1995),
            no. 3, 619–632. MR1341811
    [Sie70] L. C. Siebenmann, A total Whitehead torsion obstruction to fibering over
            the circle, Comment. Math. Helv. 45 (1970), 1–48. MR287564
   [Sik87] J.-C. Sikorav, Homologie de Novikov associée à une classe de cohomologie
            réelle de degré un, Thèse Orsay (1987).
  [Spe49] E. Specker, Die erste Cohomologiegruppe von überlagerungen und
            Homotopie-Eigenschaften dreidimensionaler Mannigfaltigkeiten, Com-
            ment. Math. Helv. 23 (1949), 303–333. MR33520
   [Sta62] J. Stallings, On fibering certain 3-manifolds, Topology of 3-manifolds and
            related topics (Proc. The Univ. of Georgia Institute, 1961), 1962, pp. 95–
            100. MR0158375
 [Swa69] R. G. Swan, Groups of cohomological dimension one, Journal of Algebra
            12 (1969), 585–610. MR240177
 [Wal67] C. T. C. Wall, Poincaré complexes. I, Ann. of Math. (2) 86 (1967), 213–
            245. MR0217791
 [Wis12] D. T. Wise, From riches to raags: 3-manifolds, right-angled Artin groups,
            and cubical geometry, CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathemat-
            ics, vol. 117, Published for the Conference Board of the Mathematical
            Sciences, Washington, DC; by the American Mathematical Society, Prov-
            idence, RI, 2012. MR2986461
[ZVC80] H. Zieschang, E. Vogt, and H.-D. Coldewey, Surfaces and planar discon-
            tinuous groups, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 835, Springer, Berlin,
            1980. Translated from the German by John Stillwell. MR606743


  Email address: fisher@maths.ox.ac.uk
  Email address: italiano@maths.ox.ac.uk
  Email address: kielak@maths.ox.ac.uk

  Mathematical Institute, Andrew Wiles Building, Observatory Quar-
ter, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX2 6GG, United Kingdom
