          ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS


                                       OLIVIER FRÉCON


         Abstract. We analyze the abstract structure of algebraic groups over an
         algebraically closed field K, using techniques from the theory of groups of
         finite Morley rank.
             For K of characteristic zero and G a given connected affine algebraic Q-
         group, the main theorem describes the algebraic structure of all the groups
         H(K) isomorphic as abstract groups to G(K), with H an affine algebraic Q-
         group. As a corollary, for any two connected algebraic Q-groups G and H,
         the abstract isomorphy of the groups G(K) and H(K) implies the algebraic
         isomorphy of their quotients by the center. Furthermore, a model theoretical
         consequence is that the elementary equivalence of the pure groups G(K) and
         H(K) implies the abstract isomorphy.
             Along the way, we consider the classical problem of abstract isomorphisms.
         As a new result, we characterize the connected algebraic groups all of whose
         abstract automorphisms are standard, when K is either Q or of positive char-
         acteristic. In characteristic zero, a sufficient algebraic condition is exhibited.




                                           Contents
   1. Introduction                                                                             1
   2. Facts                                                                                   10
   3. The ACF -expansion of a pure group                                                      17
   4. Unipotent groups over Q                                                                 25
   5. Definably affine groups                                                                 36
   6. More on pseudo-tori                                                                     42
   7. Analysis of G/Z(G) and of G0                                                            48
   8. Canonical development of G                                                              53
   9. The final argument                                                                      69
   10. Bi-interpretability and standard isomorphisms                                          72
   Acknowledgements                                                                           80
   References                                                                                 80



                                      1. Introduction
1.1. General context. This paper studies non necessarily simple algebraic groups
as abstract groups. We will tackle classical subjects as the analysis of their abstract
isomorphisms [4, 36, 29, 32, 13], and their elementary equivalence [26, 6, 9]. The

   Date: October 12, 2013.
   2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 20F11;
Secondary 03C60, 14L17, 20E36, 20G15.
   Key words and phrases. Algebraic groups, Groups of finite Morley rank, Abstract isomor-
phisms, Elementary equivalence, Burdges’ unipotence.
                                                 1
2                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON


latter is closed for Chevalley groups defined over an algebraically closed field of
characteristic not equal to two [9, Theorem 6.10]. Moreover, for simple algebraic
groups over a perfect field, the first of these topics is closed too, since Steinberg
demonstrated in [34, Theorem 30 p.158] (see also [35]) that, in this case, any ab-
stract automorphism is standard, i.e. it is the composition of a field isomorphism
ϕ : K → L and an L-isogeny (i.e. L-rational homomorphism, surjective with finite
kernel). However these results do not hold for non-simple groups, since Remark 8.11
gives two connected solvable algebraic groups over Q with a finite center which are
abstractly isomorphic but not algebraically isomorphic. Furthermore Example 3.1
(3) provides a centerless perfect algebraic group over an algebraically closed field
of characteristic zero with an abstract automorphism which is not even continuous
for the Zariski topology. In particular, the isomorphism is not standard. Thus,
in general, an abstract automorphism does not necessarily preserve the geometric
structure of the algebraic group. Based on these observations, the analyzes of ab-
stract automorphisms and of the elementary equivalence in the general case appear
less relevant than in the simple case.
   In the present paper, we will focus on a closely related question, namely the
abstract isomorphy. In other words we will look for the implications of the existence
of an abstract isomorphism between two algebraic groups. For instance, if α is an
abstract isomorphism between two connected affine algebraic groups G and H,
then α may not be standard, but the existence of α may imply the existence of
a standard isomorphism from G to H. This new issue is an intermediate topic
between the previous ones, and it seems to us a more natural subject than abstract
isomorphisms for the general case. Another feature of the present work is that no
structural assumption on the groups is made. Thus the algebraic groups are not
supposed simple or solvable for instance.
   The main result of this article is Theorem 1.1. For K an algebraically closed field
of characteristic zero and G a given connected affine algebraic Q-group, it describes
the algebraic structure of all the groups H(K) isomorphic as abstract groups to
G(K), with H an affine algebraic Q-group. Its proof lies heavily on the theory of
groups of finite Morley rank and model theory. One of its leading consequences is
the following result.
   Corollary 1.2. – Let K be an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero,
and G and H two connected affine algebraic Q-groups. If G(K) and H(K) are not
the central product of two infinite closed subgroups with a finite intersection, then:
    G(K) ≃ H(K) (as abstract groups) ⇐⇒ G(K) ≃ H(K) (as algebraic groups)


   As shown in Remarque 8.11, Corollary 1.2 does not hold when G and H are the
central product of two infinite closed subgroups with finite intersection. Moreover,
we emphasize that the proof of our main theorem would be easier if it would consider
only the groups which are not the central product of two infinite closed subgroups
with a finite intersection. Indeed, the main difficulty of §8 is precisely to consider
no such a restrictive hypothesis.
   On the other side, we need the complete statement of Theorem 1.1 in order to
obtain the following very strong property about the elementary equivalence of alge-
braic groups. Actually, the following result could have been announced as the main
theorem of this paper. In particular since both results are proven simultaneously.
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                               3


However, the statement of Theorem 1.1 is more general, since Theorem 1.6 could
be obtained as a corollary of it by using §9.
  Theorem 1.6. – Let K be an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero,
and let G and H be two connected algebraic Q-groups. Then in the language of
pure groups:
                    G(K) ≃ H(K) ⇐⇒ G(K) ≡ H(K)

    We note that, thanks to Lemma 1.7, the groups G and H are not necessarily
affine in the previous theorem.
    We do not know if our main results stated for groups of the form G(K), where
G denotes an algebraic Q-group and K an algebraically closed field of characteristic
zero, could be generalized to all algebraic groups over K. Actually, we expect that
a model theoretical argument allows this from our results. Indeed, in §9, a model
theoretical argument enables the transition from G(Q) to G(K), but this one does
not work in a more general context.
    Our analysis of the pure groups associated with an algebraic group is entirely
based on the theory of groups of finite Morley rank. Their main properties are
presented in §2. This method imposes an important restriction on us: since any
infinite field of finite Morley rank is algebraically closed (Fact 2.3), this paper con-
cerns only the algebraic groups over such a field. In comparison to the major results
on the same subject, this constraint is very strong, since the Borel-Tits Theorem [4]
on abstract homomorphisms concerns the algebraic groups over any commutative
field. In the same vein, the study of the elementary equivalence of Chevalley groups
by Bunina has no restriction on the ground field [7, 8]. But when one consider the
history of these subjects, one sees that the first steps invariably involved algebraic
groups over perfect fields [34, Theorem 30 p.158] or over algebraically closed fields
[6]. Furthermore, as soon as we focus on non-simple groups, such a restriction seems
mandatory. Indeed, there are few theorems on this subject initiated by Tits [36],
mainly because the techniques used for simple groups are not effective. The main
results known to us are the ones by Tits concerning perfect algebraic groups over
R [36], and those by Sharomet and Ponomarëv about minimal solvable algebraic
groups over fields of characteristic zero [33, 29]. More recently, other generalizations
of the Borel-Tits Theorem have been studied, such as the homomorphisms from a
simple algebraic group over a field of characteristic zero to a non-reductive algebraic
group [25], and above all the analysis of the abstract isomorphisms of Kac-Moody
groups by Caprace and Mühlherr, whose main result was first stated for Kac-Moody
groups over an algebraically closed field [13], before being generalized [14, 12].
    We emphasize that the main part of this paper concerns the algebraic groups
over an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero. Although we obtain various
results in positive characteristic as well. Indeed, it is possible to develop an analysis
of algebraic groups in the presence of a sufficiently rich structure, for example for
perfect groups and for centerless groups (cf. Theorem 10.1 below). But if such
a rich structure is not present, for example when we are dealing with a group of
nilpotency class two, such an analysis seems out of reach, as this is exemplified
by Baudisch [3] that constructs a connected nilpotent group of class two and of
finite Morley rank in which no infinite field can not interpreted. The Baudisch
example does not present an unsurmontable obstacle to extending our analysis to
nonzero characteristic since this group is not algebraic. Moreover, the theorems
4                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON


of Rabinovich [30] and of Hrushovski and Zil’ber [23] allow to interpret an infinite
field of positive characteristic in some algebraic groups with rather poor structure.
However, these do not cover all connected non-abelian groups of finite Morley rank,
and the complexity of the arguments involved [30] and of [23] make it clear that
this is a very difficult question.
    Nevertheless, one is able to obtain strong results on abstract automorphisms of
algebraic groups even in positive characteristic since nilpotent groups are not neces-
sarily involved. Thus, our main result on abstract automorphisms is the following.
   Theorem (Special case of Theorems 10.1 and 10.7). – Let G be a connected
algebraic group over an algebraically closed field K of positive characteristic. Then
the following three conditions are equivalent:
      • any automorphism of G is standard;
      • the algebraic group G and the pure group G are biinterpretable;
      • (1) the center Z(G) has no nontrivial torus, and either G/G0 is a torus,
             or Z(G) has no nontrivial unipotent element;
         (2) and the group G is not central product of two proper closed subgroups
             U and V with U ∩ V finite.
   As in the rest of this paper, for any group G, we denote by Z(G) the center of
G and by G0 its derived subgroup.
   It should be noted that the statement of Theorem 10.1 is more general than the
one above, because it can be extended to the case where K = Q as well, provided
that another technical condition than (1) above is satisfied (see Remark 10.2).
However, Theorem 10.1 does not hold when K is of positive transcendance degree
over Q (Example 3.1 (3)). In this last case, we prove the following statement.
    Theorem 10.9. – Let G be a connected algebraic group over an algebraically
closed field K of characteristic zero. Then all of its automorphisms are standard if
it satisfies the following three conditions:
     (1) either G is perfect or Z(G) is finite;
     (2) the group G is not a central product of two proper closed subgroups U and
          V with U ∩ V finite;
     (3) for each characteristic abelian closed closed subgroup A of G, and each
          maximal torus T of G, the centralizer CA (T ) is central in G.
Furthermore, under these conditions, the algebraic group G and the pure group G
are biinterpretable.

1.2. Main theorem. Some situations prevent the equivalence of the abstract iso-
morphy and isomorphy as algebraic groups. For example, when K is any alge-
                                                                                    m
braically closed field, for all the positive integers m and n, the additive groups K+
       n
and K+ are abstractly isomorphic, but they are isomorphic as algebraic groups only
if m = n. Moreover, Remark 8.11 describes another problematic situation, where
the group has finite center and is a central product of two infinite closed subgroups
with finite intersection. The main theorem of this paper, Theorem 1.1 below, shows
that these are the only pathological case when K = Q. More precisely, for K an
algebraically closed field of characteristic zero, when we fix a connected affine al-
gebraic Q-group G, it determines all the other connected affine algebraic Q-groups
H, such G(K) is abstractly isomorphic with H(K), up to isomorphism of algebraic
groups. In this paper, we denote by G◦ the identity component of any algebraic
                     ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                                 5


group G defined over an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero. Moreover,
we denote by Z(G) the center of any group G, and by G0 its derived subgroup.
Main Theorem 1.1. – For any connected affine algebraic Q-group G and any
algebraically closed field K of characteristic zero, there exists a connected affine
algebraic Q-group D and a finite central subgroup F of D(K) such that G(K) has
                        r
the form D(K)/F × K+       for r ∈ N, and such that for each affine algebraic Q-group
H, the followings conditions are equivalent:
      • H(K) is isomorphic as abstract group to G(K);
                                                                        s
      • H(K) is isomorphic as algebraic group to D(K)/α(F ) × K+          for a quasi-
        standard automorphism α of D(K), and an integer s which is zero if G(K)0
        contains Z(G(K))◦ and any natural number otherwise.
    An isomorphism α : G → H between two algebraic groups over algebraically
closed fields K and L is said to be standard if it is the composition of a field iso-
morphism ϕ : K → L and an L-isogeny (i.e. L-rational homomorphism, surjective
with finite kernel). We point out that, as throughout this paper, we identify the
field isomorphism ϕ to the corresponding map ϕ◦ : G → ϕ G, where ϕ G denotes the
algebraic group over L obtained by transfer of base field. Then an isomorphism
α : G → H is said to be quasi-standard if G = G1 × · · · × Gn and H = H1 × · · · × Hn
for G1 , . . . , Gn , H1 , . . . , Hn some algebraic subgroups such that, for each i, we have
α(Gi ) = Hi , and α|Gi : Gi → Hi is a standard isomorphism.
    We notice that, since any field automorphism of a field K and any K-isogeny
commute, the standard automorphisms of an algebraic group form a group.
    We will mention several consequences of Theorem 1.1. In particular, they are
worth mentioning Theorem 1.6, whose the proof is not direct, and the following
two results, which reformulate Theorem 1.1 in some interesting special cases.
Corollary 1.2. – Let G and H be two connected affine algebraic Q-groups and let
K be any algebraically closed field of characteristic zero. If G(K) and H(K) are
not a central product of two infinite closed subgroups with a finite intersection, then
G(K) and H(K) are isomorphic as algebraic groups.
   Proof – Theorem 1.1 provides a connected affine algebraic Q-group D, a finite
central subgroup F of D(K), and a quasi-standard automorphism α of D(K),
such that G(K) and D(K)/F (resp. H(K) and D(K)/α(F )) are isomorphic as
algebraic groups. Our hypotheses over G(K) and H(K) imply that D(K) has no
decomposition as a direct product of two infinite closed subgroups, so α is standard.
Now the map α : D(K)/F → D(K)/α(F ) defined by α(xF ) = α(x)α(F ) for each
x ∈ D(K) is a standard isomorphism, hence the algebraic groups D(K)/F and
D(K)/α(F ) are isomorphic. 
Corollary 1.3. – Let G and H be two connected (nonnecessarily affine) algebraic
Q-groups and let K be any algebraically closed field of characteristic zero. If G(K)
and H(K) are abstractly isomorphic, then they have a common algebraic central
extension.
   Moreover, G(K)/Z(G(K)) and H(K)/Z(H(K)) are isomorphic as algebraic
groups.
   Proof – By Lemma 1.7 below, there is a connected affine algebraic Q-group
GA (resp. HA ) such that GA (K) and G(K) (resp. HA (K) and H(K)) are ab-
stractly isomorphic, and such that GA (K)/Z(GA (K)) and G(K)/Z(G(K)) (resp.
6                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON


HA (K)/Z(HA (K)) and H(K)/Z(H(K))) are isomorphic as algebraic groups. Since
GA (K) and HA (K) are abstractly isomorphic, Theorem 1.1 provides a connected
algebraic Q-group D, a finite central subgroup F of D(K), a quasi-standard au-
tomorphism α of D(K), and two integers r and s such that the algebraic groups
                            r                                  s
GA (K) and D(K)/F × K+         (resp. HA (K) and D(K)/α(F ) × K+ ) are isomorphic.
Since F and α(F ) are finite, and since D is connected, we have Z(D(K)/F ×
  r                       r                         s                        s
K+  ) = Z(D(K))/F × K+        and Z(D(K)/α(F ) × K+   ) = Z(D(K))/α(F ) × K+   , so
GA (K)/Z(GA (K)) and HA (K)/Z(HA (K)) are isomorphic to D(K)/Z(D(K)) as
algebraic groups. Consequently, G(K)/Z(G(K)) and H(K)/Z(H(K)) are isomor-
phic as algebraic groups.
   Finally, the preimage in G(K) × H(K) of the graph of any isomorphism of
algebraic groups from G(K)/Z(G(K)) to H(K)/Z(H(K)) is a common algebraic
central extension for G(K) and H(K). 
   We should point that, thanks to the following lemma, it would be easy to state
similar results to above ones by considering two abstractly isomorphic groups G(K)
and H(L), where G and H would be as above and K and L would be distinct
algebraically closed fields of characteristic zero. The proof of Lemma 1.4 is based
on the fact that the pure group G has finite Morley rank.
Lemma 1.4. – Let G and H be two abstractly isomorphic connected (nonnecessarily
affine) algebraic groups over algebraically closed fields K and L of characteristic
zero. If G is either nonabelian or uncountable, there is a field isomorphism between
K and L.
   Otherwise, either G is trivial and there is no condition over L, or G is infinite
and L is any countable algebraically closed field of characteristic zero.
    Proof – We may assume that G is nontrivial. If G is nonabelian, its Borel
subgroups, i.e. its maximal solvable connected closed subgroups, are nonabelian
too. Let B be such a subgroup of G. Then B is a maximal solvable subgroup
of G, so it is definable in the pure group G [5, Corollary 5.38]. Moreover B is
connected in the pure field K, and since all the definable sets of the pure group G
are definable in K too, B is connected in the pure group G. We consider the Fitting
subgroup F (B) of B (see §2.5), which is a normal nilpotent definable subgroup of B
(Fact 2.9). Then Fact 2.21 says that F (B)/Z(B) is a U  e -group (see Definition 2.13).
In particular, F (B)/Z(B) is connected in the pure group G. Since B is a solvable
connected algebraic group, then B 0 is unipotent, so F (B) contains B 0 , and B/F (B)
is abelian. Thus, if F (B) = Z(B), then B 0 is central in B and B is nilpotent, so
we obtain B = F (B) = Z(B), contradicting that B is nonabelian. Consequently
F (B)/Z(B) is infinite. But K has characteristic zero and B is algebraic over K,
so B/Z(B) has no infinite subgroup of bounded exponent. Hence it follows from
Definition 2.13 that there is a field K0 of characteristic zero, interpretable in the
pure group G. By Fact 2.6, the fields K and K0 are definably isomorphic in the pure
field K. Since G and H are abstractly isomorphic, there is a field L0 interpretable
in the pure group H, with L0 isomorphic to K0 . In the same way, L0 and L are
isomorphic, so there is a field isomorphism between K and L. Hence we may assume
that G is abelian.
    We note that G, K, H and L have the same cardinality. Moreover, K and L
are elementarily equivalent by completeness of ACF0 [27, Corollary 3.2.3]. So, if
G is uncountable, then K and L are two uncountable algebraically closed fields
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                              7


of characteristic zero with the same cardinality, hence they are isomorphic by the
κ-categoricity of ACF0 [27, Proposition 2.2.5].
   If G is abelian and countable, then K and L are necessarily countable. By
Lemma 1.7, there is a connected affine algebraic group GA over K such that GA
and G are abstractly isomorphic. Then we find two integers r and s with rs 6= 0
such that the algebraic groups GA and (K ∗ )r × K+    s
                                                         are isomorphic. But, for any
countable algebraically closed field F of characteristic zero, (K ∗ )r ×K+
                                                                         s
                                                                           is abstractly
                  ∗ r     s
isomorphic to (F ) × F+ , so we obtain the result. 

1.3. Methods. The methods and tools that will be used in this paper comes from
the theory of groups of finite Morley rank. Indeed, the geometric and algebraic
classical methods seem not appropriate for the study of the abstract structure of
nonnecessarily simple groups, while the bulk of the present work concerns nonnec-
essary simple groups. By cons, in the 80’s, B.I. Zil’ber [37], then B. Poizat [28],
showed that model theory is potentially effective for our subject, since they dealt
with a model-theoretic proof of the theorem of the abstract isomorphisms of simple
algebraic groups in the algebraically closed context. Furthermore, the main part of
the arguments does not deal with simple groups, and the last part of the proof of
[28, Corollary 4.17] provides the following rather general piece of information about
the abstract isomorphisms. Actually, a slightly more elaborate version of this result
will be fundamental for us (see Fact 3.6).

Fact 1.5. – [28, Proof of Corollaire 4.17] Let α be an abstract isomorphism between
two algebraic groups G and H over algebraically closed field. If, in the pure group
G, there is an interpretable field K and a definable isomorphism from G to an
algebraic group over K, then α is a standard isomorphism.

   A brief introduction to the theory of groups of finite Morley rank is given in §2,
and for more details about these groups, we may refer to [1, 5, 27, 28]. Roughly
speaking, Morley rank is an ordinal-valued abstract dimension notion that arose in
model theory. Model theory studies structure using a certain formalism. A struc-
ture is an underlying set together with the graphs of some distinguished relations
and functions. Thus an “abstract” group, or a pure group as model theorists would
say, is a set G with the group law, inversion and the constant 1, as the distin-
guished binary, unary and 0-ary operations (one writes (G, · , −1 , 1)). Any subset
of Gn (n ∈ N) described using first-order logic and symbols defining the three
functions, the pure group language, is a definable set. More generally, one defines a
interpretable set as a quotient of a definable set by a definable equivalence relation.
   Using this line, a (pure) field is a structure of the form (K, +, −, · , 0, 1), where
+, − and · are binary functions and 0 and 1 are constants. In this structure,
the definable sets coincide with the constructible ones. This structural equivalence
between definability and constructibility in the case of algebraically closed fields
has a consequence at the level of model-theoretic and geometric dimensions:

                         Morley rank = Zariski dimension.

One question in the present paper is to compare the definable sets in an affine
algebraic group when this group is seen as a pure group structure and when it is seen
as a constructible set in an algebraically closed field. Since affine algebraic groups
are examples of groups of finite Morley rank, it is natural that model theoretic
8                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


techniques are relevant for questions of algebro-geometric nature such as the ones
addressed in this paper.
   Usually, the two most natural ways for a model theorist to view an algebraic
group is as a pure group, or as a group, interpretable in a pure field. In this
paper, we introduce an intermediate notion: the ACF -expansion of a pure group
(Definition 3.2). Indeed, on the one hand, the pure group is not sufficiently rich
for our subject (see Example 3.1 (2) and (3)), and on the other hand abstract
isomorphisms do not preserve all the sets interpretable in the pure field. However,
the ACF -expansion of a pure group is effective just if the ground field is isomorphic
to the algebraic closure Q of the field Q (see Lemma 3.10 for instance). Thus, most
of our analysis is concerned with algebraic groups over Q. In the final argument (§9),
a model-theoretical argument will generalize the result over Q to any algebraically
closed field of characteristic zero.
   As in [28], in order to analyze the abstract structure of algebraic groups over Q,
and more generally the one of algebraic groups over an algebraically closed field,
we remark that their associated pure groups are of finite Morley rank. In fact, we
introduce in §4 the notion of a ACF -group, including the one of a pure group and
the one of the ACF -expansion of a pure group. Then a very substantial part of the
article is to prove Theorem 7.13. This one says that, if G is a connected algebraic
group over Q then, in the ACF -expansion of pure group G, the quotient G/Z(G)
is definably linear, in the sense of Definition 4.2. The core of the proof relies on the
Burdges’ unipotence theory [10], its improvements in [17] and [18, §3.2], and the
theory of solvable groups of finite Morley rank. Another key point is the notion of
a pseudo-torus (Definition 2.8), a concept derived from the one of a decent torus of
a group of finite Morley rank, and of a torus of an algebraic group. Indeed, they
are the basis of the analysis of U e -groups, and thus they make possible the use of
the Burdges’ unipotence for algebraic groups.

1.4. About elementary equivalence. It is noticeable that the final argument
of the proof of Theorem 1.1 provides another strong result. Indeed, Theorem 1.6
below is proven in §9 for affine groups, simultaneously with the main theorem.
Thus, in this paper, if G denotes a connected affine algebraic Q-group and K an
algebraically closed field of characteristic zero, we describe all the affine algebraic
Q-groups H such that H(K) is elementarily equivalent to G(K), and not only
abstractly isomorphic to G(K).

Theorem 1.6. – Let G and H be two connected (nonnecessarily affine) algebraic
Q-groups and let K be an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero. Then
G(K) and H(K) are abstractly isomorphic if and only if their pure groups are
elementarily equivalent.

  Furthermore, thanks to Lemma 1.7 below, we note that the groups are not
necessarily affine in Theorem 1.6.

Lemma 1.7. – Let G be any connected algebraic group over an algebraically closed
field K of characteristic zero. Then there is a connected affine algebraic group GA
over K such that GA and G are abstractly isomorphic.
    Moreover, we may choose GA such that GA /Z(GA ) and G/Z(G) are isomorphic
as algebraic groups.
                   ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            9


    Proof – Let N be the smallest connected normal algebraic subgroup of G such
that G/N is affine [31, §5, Corollary 3 p.431], and let A be the largest connected
affine algebraic subgroup of G [31, §5, Theorem 16]. Then, by [31, §5, Corollary 1
p.433], we have N ≤ Z(G), and by [31, §5, Corollary 5 p.440], we have G = AN and
N contains only a finite number of elements of any given finite order. So (A ∩ N )◦
and N are abelian and divisible, and (A ∩ N )◦ has a (nonnecessarily algebraic)
divisible complement R in N .
    By the choice of A, the group (A ∩ N )◦ is the largest connected affine algebraic
subgroup of N , and N/(A ∩ N )◦ is an abelian variety by [31, §5, Theorem 16].
Consequently, for each integer n, the group R ≃ N/(A ∩ N )◦ has n2g elements
of order dividing n, where g denotes the dimension of N/(A ∩ N )◦ . This implies
that R is abstractly isomorphic to the torus (K ∗ )2g , so the affine algebraic group
A × (K ∗ )2g is abstractly isomorphic to A × R. But we have G = AN = AR and
A ∩ R ≤ (A ∩ N ) ∩ R is finite, so there is an abstract surjective homomorphism
τ : A × (K ∗ )2g → G such that τ (x, 1) = x for each x ∈ A, and with finite kernel E.
Hence there is an abstract isomorphism σ from G to the connected affine algebraic
group GA := (A × (K ∗ )2g )/E, such that its restriction σ|A : A → (A × {1})E/E is
an isomorphism of algebraic groups. Thus, since we have N ≤ Z(G) and G = AN ,
we obtain G = AZ(G), and the map σ : G/Z(G) → GA /Z(GA ) induced by σ is an
isomorphism of algebraic groups. 

1.5. Plan of the article. After reminders of known facts in §2, we analyze the
following very special group in §3:
                                                        
                        t a u                             
                                           ∗             3
                 G =  0 t v  | t ∈ Q , (a, u, v) ∈ Q       .
                            0 0 1
                                                          

For that, we introduce the notion of a ACF -expansion of a pure group (Definition
3.2), and we prove that the maximal tori of G are definable in the ACF -expansion
of the pure group G (Proposition 3.11).
    In §4, we study the unipotent groups over Q, and we prove that, for each con-
nected nilpotent algebraic group G over Q, the quotient G/Z(G) is definably linear
(in the sense of Definition 4.2) in the ACF -expansion of the pure group G (Theo-
rem 4.3). In order to study the minimal configuration, we need Proposition 3.11.
Moreover, a key point of this section is the Hoschild-Mostow Theorem (Fact 4.5),
of which we provide a model-theoretic proof for the special case used here (Fact
4.6).
    Section §5 is devoted to the study of the ACF -groups and ACF0 -groups (see
the beginning of §4 for the definitions). These concepts encompass different ways
of seeing an algebraic group for the model-theorist: as a pure group, as the ACF -
expansion of a pure group, or as a group interpretable in a pure field for instance.
Moreover, it appears that the notion of a definably linear group is not sufficient
to analyze the ACF -groups (see Example 5.1). Therefore we introduce a slightly
thinness concept: the definably affine groups (Definition 5.2). In particular, each
ACF -group G has a largest connected definably affine subgroup (Corollary 5.10),
and a smallest normal definable subgroup W (G) such that G/W (G) is definably
affine (Corollary 5.18). It is noticeable that the proofs are somewhat more for-
mal in this section, and most results are valid for the algebraic groups over any
algebraically closed field, not just over Q.
10                                OLIVIER FRÉCON


   When the ground field of an algebraic group G is algebraically closed of charac-
teristic zero, the definability of tori becomes a problem. We approach this problem
using decent tori and pseudo-tori (Definition 2.8). However, even if G is a centerless
connected algebraic group over Q, the maximal tori of the pure group G may not be
definable (Example 3.1 (2)). In §6, we prove that, when G is a connected solvable
algebraic group over Q, then T ∩ F (G) is central in G for each pseudo-torus T of
the ACF -expansion of the pure group G (Theorem 6.3), where F (G) denotes the
Fitting subgroup of G (see §2.5). Moreover, it is noticeable that, in order to study
the minimal configuration, we need Proposition 3.11 again.
   From this result, from the analysis of the unipotent groups in §4, and from the
one of the ACF -groups in §5, we deduce Theorem 7.13, which is fundamental for
us. Indeed, it says that when G is a connected algebraic group over Q, then G/Z(G)
is definably linear in the ACF -expansion of the pure group G. It is the base of the
construction of the group D in the main theorem. Actually, this last group is built
in §8. Its construction is rather natural, but above all, we have a serious problem
with some central finite subgroups of it (see the proof of Theorem 8.14).
   The transition from Q to any algebraically closed field of characteristic zero is
made in §9, essentially by a classical model-theoretic argument. Furthermore, it is
noticeable that the end of the proof of the main result provides simultaneously the
one of Theorem 1.6 in the affine case (the general case of Theorem 1.6 follows from
the affine case and from Lemma 1.7).
   In §10, we consider the abstract isomorphisms between algebraic groups over
an algebraically closed field of any characteristic, and the bi-interpretability of
algebraic groups with their pure groups associated. The proofs depends mainly
from §5 and §7.




                                      2. Facts
   The notations will be as in [5], which is also our main reference for groups of
finite Morley rank. In this section we recall some definitions and known results.
   Here is a list of the main notations and definitions used in this paper, with where
they are defined.
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            11


                           ·◦         §2.3
                           d( · )     §2.3
                           F(·)       §2.5
                           J( · )     §2.6
                           UK ( · )   Not. 2.12
                           e( · )
                           U          Def. 2.13
                           V (·)      Not. 4.10
                           A( · )     Cor. 5.10
                           W(·)       Cor. 5.18
                           Φ( · )     §6
                           S( · )     §7
                           T (·)      §7
                           Q( · )     §7
                           T(·)       §8
                           D( · )     §8
            S-minimal                                           §2.3
            Decent torus                                        Def. 2.8
            Pseudo-torus                                        Def. 2.8
            Groups of finite Morley rank Fitting subgroup       §2.5
            Indecomposable group                                §2.6
            UK -group                                           Def. 2.13
            U
            e -group                                            Def. 2.13
            T -expansion                                        Def. 3.2
            ACF -group                                          §4
            Definably linear group                              Def. 4.2
            Definably affine group                              Def. 5.2
            Carter subgroup                                     §6
            Frattini subgroup                                   §6
            Quasiunipotent radical                              §7
            Centrally indecomposable group                      Def. 8.3
2.1. Definable sets. For the convenience of readers notfamiliar with groups of
finite Morley rank, we devote this part to the introduction of these groups. We
refer to [1, 5, 27, 28] for details and many other information.
   A structure M is an underlying set M equipped with
       • a possibly empty family {ci | i ∈ IC } of distinguished elements of M , called
         constants;
       • a possibly empty family {fi | i ∈ IF } of functions with fi : M ni → M for
         each i ∈ IF , where ni ∈ N∗ and depends only on fi ;
       • a family {Ri | i ∈ IR } of relations on M ki for each i ∈ IR , where ki ∈ N∗
         and depends only on Ri .
The three sets IC , IF , IR are the families of indices. It is worth noting that the
equality is always part of the relations, the reason why the family of relations is
never empty. Also, constants are nothing but 0-ary functions.
   To concretize this formalism, a group can be regarded as the following structure
                                G = (G; · , −1 , 1, =)
where G is the underlying non-empty set, · is the binary group operation, the unary
function −1 is the groupfirst order formula inversion, 1 is the identity element of the
12                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON


group G and = is the only relation. It is common practice to exclude the equality
from the notation. A group structure considered with no other constant, function
or relation is called a pure group. Pure fields are other examples of structures. Such
a structure is of the form (K, +, −, · , 0, 1), where +, − and · are binary functions
and 0 and 1 are constants.
     The set of terms is inductively defined using constants, functions and variables
symbols. An atomic formula is any expression of the form R(t1 , · · · , tn ), where
t1 , · · · , tn are terms. The set of (first order) formulas is inductively defiNeverthe-
lessned :
      • any atomic formula is a formula;
      • if α and β are two formulas, then ¬α, α ∧ β, α ∨ β, α → β and α ↔ β are
        formulas;
      • if α is a formula and if x is a variable symbol, then ∃xα and ∀xα are
        formulas.
A subset of a cartesian power of the underlying set M is said to be definable in the
structure M if it can be described using a formula. For example, the center Z(G)
of a group G is definable in the pure group (G; · , −1 , 1) as the set of the elements
z ∈ G satisfying the formula ∀x x · z = z · x. By cons, in general, a set defined as
the generated set by a definable subset is not definable. Thus the derived subgroup
G0 of G is not necessarily definable.
   A function or relation is said be definable if its graph is a definable set. Using
these notions, one extends the notion of definability, and introduces a structure that
is definable in another structure. Intuitively speaking, a structure M is said to be
definable in a structure M0 if its underlying set and signature are definable in M0 .
This definition is extended further by allowing “quotients”, in other words definable
sets modulo definable equivalence relations. Some call these structures interpretable.
We will keep using the word “definable” since in a suitable model-theoretic setup
everything interpretable becomes definable.
   A relevant group-theoretic example is an algebraic group over a field. By its very
definition, the underlying set of such a group, its group operations and identity
element are all definable using field operations. On the other hand, whether one
can recover up to a reasonable isomorphism, the underlying field and its geometry
using the bare group structure is a less obvious question. Indeed, the answer may
even be negative, and the quest for such an answer is a major activity in model
theory that lies among the aims of this paper.

2.2. Groups of finite Morley rank. For the model-theoretical definition of the
Morley rank and of the groups of finite Morley rank, we refer to [27, §6-7]. For
simplicity, we prefer to introduce the groups of finite Morley rank from the Borovik-
Poizat axiomatization.
   First A.V. Borovik introduced a rank for any structure M. Namely, to any
non-empty interpretable set A, he associates a rank denoted by rk(A), belonging to
N ∪ {+∞} and defined by the following assertion


      • for all n ∈ N, we have rk(A) ≥ n + 1 if and only if there are infinitely
        many pairwise disjoint, interpretable, non-empty subsets of A each of rank
        at least n.
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                              13


    In particular, an interpretable non-empty set A is of rank zero if and only if it
is finite.
    Moreover, A.V. Borovik introduced several axioms, and B. Poizat provided the
following characterization of groups of finite Morley rank.
Fact 2.1. – [28] We consider a structure of group (G; · , −1 , 1, · · · ) not necessarily
assumed pure, and the function rk defined above.
   The group G is of finite Morley rank is and only if, for each definable application
f between two definable sets A and B, the following three axioms hold:
      • the rank rk(A) is an integer;
      • the set {b ∈ B | rk(f −1 (b)) = n} is interpretable for each n ∈ N;
      • there is an integer m such that, for any b ∈ B, the set f −1 (b) is infinite
        whenever it contains at least m elements.
   If the group G is of finite Morley rank, then for each non-empty definable set A,
the integer rk(A) is the Morley rank of A.
   The main class of examples of groups of finite Morley rank is algebraic groups
defined over an algebraically closed field (see [28] for more details). Indeed, if
we consider an algebraically closed field structure K = (K; +, ., −1 , −, 0, 1), then
one can show that the underlying set K has Morley rank one. Moreover, one can
that any structure definable in a structure of finite Morley rank is of finite Morley
rank too. Thus algebraic groups over algebraically closed fields are groups of finite
Morley rank. In this case, the definable sets are the constructible ones, and the
Morley rank is the Zariski dimension. The main conjecture on groups of finite
Morley rank concerns their links with algebraic groups in the simple case. It is the
following one.

Cherlin-Zil’ber Conjecture 2.2. – Any infinite simple group of finite Morley
rank is isomorphic as abstract group to a linear algebraic group defined over an
algebraically closed field.

  At this stage, we have to note that, by the following result, the fields of finite
Morley rank are the finite ones, and the algebraically closed ones. Thus, in this
paper, all the infinite fields are algebraically closed.
Fact 2.3. – [5, Theorem 8.1] A field definable in a structure of finite Morley rank
is either finite or algebraically closed.
2.3. Descending chain condition on definable subgroups. The class of groups
of finite Morley rank is a subclass of stable groups (see [27]). These last groups sat-
isfy the descending chain condition on definable subgroups. In other words, in a
group of finite Morley rank, there is no infinite descending chain of definable sub-
groups. This leads several natural notions, and very useful in this paper.
   Indeed, by descending chain condition on definable subgroups, any definable
subgroup H of a group G of finite Morley rank has a smallest definable subgroup
of finite index. The latter is the connected component of H, and it is denoted by
H ◦ . The link between the connected component of a group of finite Morley rank
and the identity component of an algebraic group is clarified by Lemma 4.1.
   Naturally, a group G of finite Morley rank is said be connected if it is equal to
its connected component.
14                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON


   Again by descending chain condition on definable subgroups, for any subset X
of a group G of finite Morley rank, the intersection of all the definable subgroups of
G which contain X is a definable subgroup of G. The latter is the definable hull of
X, and it is denoted by d(X). This notion offers an analogue to the Zariski closure
in algebraic geometry.
   An infinite normal definable subgroup A of a group G of finite Morley rank is said
to be S-minimal, where S is any subset of G, if A is infinite, definable, normalized
by S and minimal for these conditions. By descending chain condition on definable
subgroups, for each subset S of G, any infinite normal definable subgroup B of
G contains an S-minimal subgroup. It is noticeable that, when G is solvable and
connected, then any S-minimal subgroup of G is abelian [5, Proposition 7.7].
2.4. Some fundamental theorems. The Zil’ber’s Indecomposability Theorem is
one of fundamental result of the theory of groups of finite Morley rank. It is rather
technical, and we refer to [28, 5] for its complete statement, which is not directly
used in this paper. However, its important corollaries are away used.
Fact 2.4. – Let G be a group of finite Morley rank. Then the following assertions
are true.
      • (Special case of [5, Theorem 5.26]) The subgroup generated by a set of
        definable connected subgroups of G is definable and connected.
      • [5, Corollary 5.29] If H is a definable connected subgroup of G, the subgroup
        [H, X] is definable and connected for any subset X of G.
      • [5, Corollary 5.38] If H is a solvable (resp. nilpotent) subgroup of class n
        of G, then d(H) is also solvable (resp. nilpotent) of class n.
   The following result due also to B. Zil’ber confers a central importance on fields
of finite Morley rank. We recall that, by Fact 2.3, an infinite field of finite Morley
rank is always algebraically closed.
Fact 2.5. – [5, Theorem 9.1] Let G = A o H be a group of finite Morley rank
where A and H are two infinite definable abelian subgroups, A is H-minimal and
CH (A) = 1. Then G interprets an algebraically closed field K such that A ≃ K+
definably, and H is definably isomorphic to a subgroup of K ∗ .
  B. Poizat proved the following two results, which will be very useful in our
context.
Fact 2.6. – [28, Théorème 4.15] Let F be an algebraically closed field. Then, in the
pure field F , every infinite definable field K is definably isomorphic to F .
Fact 2.7. – [28, Corollaire 3.3] Let K be a field of finite Morley rank of characteristic
zero. Then K+ has no nontrivial proper definable subgroup.
2.5. Decent tori and pseudo-tori. In [15], G. Cherlin defines decent tori as an
analogue to algebraic tori. In [20], we introduce pseudo-tori, as a more general
notion, independant of torsion. Here we relate just the more general results used in
this paper concerning pseudo-tori, but their proofs are very often similar to their
analogues in [15] concerning decent tori. Moreover, pseudo-tori are the basis of
U
e -groups defined below.

Definition 2.8. – Let T be a radicable abelian group of finite Morley rank.
     • We say that T is a decent torus if T is the definable hull of its torsion.
                   ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                           15


     • We say that T is a pseudo-torus if no definable quotient of T is definably
       isomorphic to the additive group K+ of an interpretable field K.
   We note that any decent torus is a pseudo-torus, and any pseudo-torus is con-
nected. In Fact 2.10, we summarize the main properties of pseudo-tori. Before
stating it, we have to recall that the Fitting subgroup F (G) of an arbitrary group
G is the subgroup generated by all the normal nilpotent subgroups of G. In groups
of finite Morley rank, its main property is its definability.
Fact 2.9. – [5, Theorem 7.3]. In any group G of finite Morley rank, the Fitting
subgroup is nilpotent and definable.
Fact 2.10. – Let G be a group of finite Morley rank. Then,
    (i) [20, Theorem 1.7] the maximal pseudo-tori of G are conjugate;
   (ii) [20, Proposition 2.7] for any pseudo-torus T of G, NG (T )◦ centralizes T ;
  (iii) [20, Corollaries 2.8 and 2.9] F (G) has a unique maximal pseudo-torus, and
        this one is central in G◦ ;
  (iν) [20, Corollary 2.13] if N is a normal definable subgroup of G, the maximal
        pseudo-tori of G/N are the images of the maximal pseudo-tori of G.
2.6. Unipotence. In [10], J. Burdges introduced some analogues of the algebraic
unipotence for groups of finite Morley rank. In [17, 18], we continued the analysis
of these concepts. Here are considered U    e -groups introduced in [18]. This notion
heavily depends on pseudo-tori [20]. We summarize the general results needed,
and we refer to [10, 17, 18] for a more complete introduction to these unipotence
notions.
    To obtain a notion analogous to the unipotence in algebraic groups, Burdges [10]
first introduces the notion of indecomposable group.
    An abelian connected group A of finite Morley rank is indecomposable if it is not
the sum of two proper definable subgroups. If A 6= 1, then A has a unique maximal
proper definable connected subgroup J(A), and if A = 1, let J(1) = 1.
    The first result is nontrivial and is consequence of Fact 2.10 (iν) above.
Fact 2.11. – [20, Lemma 2.2] Let G be a group of finite Morley rank and H a
definable normal subgroup of G. If B is a radicable indecomposable definable abelian
subgroup of G/H, then there is an indecomposable definable abelian subgroup A of
G such that B = AH/H.
   In particular, Fact 2.11 says that any (nonnecessarily abelian) radicable group of
finite Morley rank is generated by its indecomposable definable abelian subgroups.
   We recall the definitions and properties of U
                                               e -groups.

Notation 2.12. – For any group G of finite Morley rank and any interpretable
field K of characteristic zero, we denote by UK (G) the subgroup of G generated
by its indecomposable definable abelian subgroups A such that A/J(A) is definably
isomorphic to K+ .
Definition 2.13. –
     • A group G of finite Morley rank is said to be a UK -group, where K is an
       interpretable field of characteristic zero, if G = UK (G). We say that a
       UK -group G is homogeneous if each definable connected subgroup of G is a
       UK -subgroup.
16                                OLIVIER FRÉCON


     • For every group G of finite Morley rank, we denote by Ue (G) the subgroup of
       G generated by its normal homogeneous UK -subgroups, for the interpretable
       fields K of characteristic zero, and by its normal definable connected sub-
       groups of bounded exponent.
     • AU  e -group is a group G of finite Morley rank such that G = Ue (G).

Remark 2.14. –
   • By Fact 2.7, any radicable indecomposable definable abelian subgroup is
     either a pseudo-torus or a UK -group for an interpretable field K of charac-
     teristic 0.
   • By Fact 2.10 (iν) and Fact 2.17 below, in any U e -group, each pseudo-torus
     is trivial.
   The below facts 2.15-2.21 comes from [18], but their proofs are not given in [18].
Indeed, they are mainly obtained by using [20] in place of [15], and their proofs are
similar to the ones of [10, 11, 17].
Fact 2.15. – (see [18, Fact 3.10] and [11, Theorem 3.4]) Let G be a radicable
nilpotent group of finite Morley rank, and let T be its maximal pseudo-torus. Then
G interprets some fields K1 , · · · , Kn of characteristic zero such that
                     G = T ∗ UK1 (G) ∗ UK2 (G) ∗ · · · ∗ UKn (G),
where ∗ denotes the central product.
Fact 2.16. – (see [18, Fact 3.11] and [17, Theorem 4.11]) Let G be a connected group
of finite Morley rank, and K an interpretable field of characteristic zero. Assume
that G acts definably by conjugation on H, a nilpotent UK -group. Then [G, H] is
a homogeneous UK -subgroup.
Fact 2.17. – (see [18, Fact 3.13] and [17, Theorem 5.4]) Let G be a nilpotent
e -group. Then G interprets some algebraically closed fields K1 , · · · , Kn of charac-
U
teristic zero such that the following decomposition holds:
                    G = B × UK1 (G) × UK2 (G) × · · · × UKn (G)
where B is a definable connected characteristic subgroup of bounded exponent, and
UKs (G) a homogeneous UKs -subgroup (for s ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}).
Fact 2.18. – (see [18, Fact 3.15] and [17, Proposition 5.7]) Let G be a torsion-free
group of finite Morley rank containing no nontrivial pseudo-torus. Then G is a
U
e -group if and only if, for each interpretable field K of characteristic zero, UK (G)
is a homogeneous UK -subgroup.
Fact 2.19. – (see [18, Fact 3.16] and [17, Corollary 5.8])
     • Every definable quotient of a Ue -group is a Ue -group.
     • Every definable connected subgroup of a U  e -group is a U
                                                                e -group.

Fact 2.20. – (see [18, Fact 3.18] and [10, Lemma 2.11]) Let G be a group of finite
Morley rank, U and V be two definable subgroups with V normal in G, and K be
an interpretable field of characteristic zero. Then UK (U V /V ) = UK (U )V /V .
Fact 2.21. – (see [18, Fact 3.25] and [17, Results 5.8, 6.12 and 6.20]) Let G be a
solvable connected group of finite Morley rank. Then F (G)/Z(G) is a U e -group.
                   ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            17


   Furthermore, the proof of [17, Theorem 6.10] applied with U
                                                             e -groups provides
the following result.
Fact 2.22. – (see [17, Theorem 6.10]) Let G be a connected group of finite Morley
rank. Assume that G acts definably by conjugation on H a solvable connected group
of finite Morley rank. Then [G, H] is a U
                                        e -group.

                   3. The ACF -expansion of a pure group
   First we focus on a very particular algebraic group. We consider the algebraic
closure Q of Q and the following subgroup of GL(3, Q):
                                                        
                     t a u                                
                                            ∗            3
                       0 t v  | t ∈ Q , (a, u, v) ∈ Q      .
                         0 0 1
                                                          

This group will play a key role for us. However, the following examples show that
the notion of a pure group is not sufficiently rich to analyze it. In order to remedy
to this problem, we will define the ACF -expansion of a pure group (Definition 3.2).
Example 3.1. –
   (1) Let Q̃ denote a proper elementary extension of the pure field Q. We consider
       the following solvable centerless connected algebraic group
                                                           
                       t a u                                 
                 G̃ =  0 t v  | t ∈ Q̃∗ , (a, u, v) ∈ Q̃3 .
                           0 0 1
                                                             

        Then G̃ has an abstract automorphism α such that α(T ) is not Zariski
        closed for any maximal torus T of G̃. Thus the maximal tori of G̃ are not
        definable in the pure group G̃.
           Furthermore, the latter implies that the automorphism α is not contin-
        uous for the Zariski topology of G̃. In particular, α is not standard.
           Indeed, since Q̃ is a proper extension of Q, it has a nonzero derivation
        δ. Then we consider the map α : G̃ → G̃ defined by
                                                              
                       t a u             t a + δ(t) u + δ(v)
                 α 0 t v  =  0               t         v      ,
                       0 0 1             0      0         1
        for each t ∈ Q̃∗ and each (a, u, v) ∈ Q̃3 . It is an abstract automorphism of
        G̃, so for each subset X of G̃, the set X is definable in the pure group G̃ if
        and only if α(X) is definable in the pure group G̃.
           We verify α(T ) is not Zariski closed for any maximal torus T of G̃. By
        conjugacy of maximal tori in G̃, we may assume that T is the diagonal
        subgroup of G̃. Then we have
                   T ∩ α(T ) = {diag(t, t, 1) | t ∈ Q̃∗ , δ(t) = 0},
        so neither T ∩ α(T ), nor α(T ) is Zariski closed.
    (2) Now we consider the pure group
                                                          
                       t a u                                
                                               ∗           3
                 G =  0 t v  | t ∈ Q , (a, u, v) ∈ Q         .
                            0 0 1
                                                            
18                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


         By Lemma 3.10 below, all of its abstract automorphisms are standard.
         Nevertheless, we cannot apply Fact 1.5 to G, since G does not verify its
         hypotheses.
             Indeed, otherwise, in the pure group G, there would be an interpretable
         field K and a definable isomorphism ν from G to an algebraic group H over
         K. In particular, K and ν would be definable in the pure field Q, so ν(T )
         would be a maximal torus of H for each maximal torus T of G. Then, by
         the definability of K in G, the subgroups ν(T ) and T would be definable in
         G. But Q̃ is a proper elementary extension of the pure field Q, so the pure
         group G̃ is an elementary extension of the pure group G, and the extension
         T̃ of T to G̃ is a maximal torus of G̃. Hence T̃ would be definable in the
         pure group G̃, contradicting the previous example.
             We note that the argument above shows that, in the pure group G,
            • there is no definable isomorphism from G to an algebraic group over
               an interpretable field.
            • the maximal tori of G are not definable.
     (3) The algebraic groups G̃ and G above are solvable of class two, centerless
         and connected. However, we obtain the same conclusions by considering the
         algebraic groups H̃ and H below instead of G̃ and G respectively, whereas
         H̃ and H are perfect, centerless and connected.
             Indeed, consider the following perfect connected affine algebraic group
                                                                                
               
                   a b r s                                                        
                                                                                   
                     c d t u 
                                                                                 
                                                                    8
         R=                       | (a, b, c, d, r, s, t, u) ∈ Q   , ad − bc = 1  ,
               
                    0 0 a b                                                      
                                                                                   
                     0 0 c d
                                                                                  

         and the group H := R/Z(R). Then H is a perfect centreless connected
         algebraic group over Q.
            Now let Q̃ be as above, and let R̃ and H̃ be the elementary extensions
         of R and H respectively to Q̃. Then H̃ is a perfect centreless connected
         algebraic group over Q̃.
            If we consider a nonzero derivation δ of Q̃, and the abstract automor-
         phism β of R̃ defined by
                                                               
                    a b r s             a b r + δ(a) s + δ(b)
                 c d t u   c d t + δ(c) u + δ(d) 
               β
                 0 0 a b = 0 0
                                                                ,
                                                  a          b    
                    0 0 c d             0 0        c         d
         for each (a, b, c, d, r, s, t, u) ∈ Q̃8 satisfying ad − bc = 1. Then β induces an
         automorphism β of H̃. Arguing as for the automorphism α above, we show
         that β is not continuous for the Zariski topology of G̃. In particular, β is
         not standard.
            Thus, as in (2), H does not verify the hypotheses of Fact 1.5. Even
         so, since H is not a direct product of two proper subgroups, it follows from
         Fact 3.6, Lemma 5.6 and Theorem 7.13 below, that all the abstract auto-
         morphisms of H are standard.
  The three examples in 3.1 above show that the pure group structure of a con-
nected affine algebraic group may not be as rich as its definable geometric structure,
                      ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                                   19


even when the group is centerless. This motivates the following definition. We note
that, in this paper, the word definable signifies definable with parameters.
Definition 3.2. – Let T be a theory in a language L , and let M = (M ; · · · ) be a
structure in a language L 0 . We assume that M is interpretable in a model of T .
      • Let n ∈ N and A ⊆ M n . Then A is said to be T -definable if, for each
        isomorphism f from M to another L 0 -structure M1 , and for each model
        N of T interpreting M1 , the set f (A) is definable in N .
      • For each n ∈ N, let An be the family of the T -definable subsets of M n and,
        for each A ∈ An , let RA be a symbol     of an n-ary relation. We consider
        A = ∪n∈N An and L ∗ = L 0 ∪ ( A∈A RA ).
                                        S
      • The T -expansion of M = (M ; · · · ) is the L ∗ -expansion M ∗ = (M ; · · · ) of
                     M∗
        M , where RA    = A for each A ∈ A .
   By the following results, if a structure M is interpretable in a model of a theory
T , then any automorphism of M preserves the definable sets of its T -expansion
M ∗ (Corollary 3.5). Thus, in our context where we consider some group isomor-
phisms, and since M ∗ seems to be richer than M , it appears more interesting to
work in M ∗ than in M .
Lemma 3.3. – Let T be a theory in a language L , and let M = (M ; · · · ) be a
structure interpretable in a model of T . Then, for each n ∈ N and each A ⊆ M n ,
the set A is definable in the T -expansion M ∗ of M if and only if it is T -definable.
   Proof – We may assume that A definable in M ∗ , and we have just to prove that
A is T -definable. We assume toward a contradiction that A is not T -definable.
In particular, it is not definable in M , its complement is not T -definable, and it
is neither a union nor an intersection of two T -definable sets. Moreover, it is not
of the form M × X for a T -definable set X, and there is no T -definable subset X
of M n+1 such that A = π(X) where π : M n+1 → M n denotes the projection map
defined for any (x1 , . . . , xn+1 ) ∈ M n+1 by π(x1 , . . . , xn+1 ) = (x1 , . . . , xn ). Hence
[27, Proposition 1.3.4] says that we may assume that there exists m ∈ N, a T -
definable subset X of M n+m and b ∈ M m such that A = {a ∈ M n | (a, b) ∈ X}.
But again in this last case, it follows from the definition that A is T -definable, as
claimed. 
Corollary 3.4. – Let T be a theory in a language L , and let M = (M ; · · · ) and
M 0 = (M 0 ; · · · ) be two L 0 -structures interpretable in some models of T , where L 0
is another language. Let f : M → M 0 be an isomorphism, and let M ∗ and M 0∗
be the T -expansions of M and M 0 respectively. Then, for each n ∈ N and each
A ⊆ M n definable in M ∗ , the set f (A) is definable in M 0∗ .
   Proof – Let g be an isomorphism from M 0 to another L 0 -structure M1 . We
assume that M1 is interpretable in a model N of T . Then g ◦ f is an isomorphism
from M to M1 . Now, since A is T -definable by Lemma 3.3, the set g(f (A)) is
definable in N . This proves that f (A) is definable in M 0∗ . 
Corollary 3.5. – Let T be a theory in a language L , and let M be a structure in-
terpretable in a model of T . Then any automorphism of M preserves the definable
sets of its T -expansion M ∗ .
   It is noticeable that, by the previous result, the proof of [28, Corollaire 4.17]
provides the very general following fact, which is fundamental for us.
20                                OLIVIER FRÉCON


Fact 3.6. – [28, Proof of Corollaire 4.17] Let α be an abstract isomorphism between
two algebraic groups G and H over algebraically closed fields. If, in the ACF -
expansion of the pure group G, there are an interpretable field K and a definable
isomorphism from a definable section U/V to an algebraic group over K, then the
isomorphism α|U/V : U/V → α(U )/α(V ) is standard.
   Furthermore, we notice that the definition of the T -expansion of a structure M
for a theory T is rather robust.
Lemma 3.7. – Let T be a theory in a language L , and let M be a structure in
a language L 0 . We assume that M is interpretable in a model of T . Let M0 be
another structure, interpretable in the T -expansion of M . If A is a set, definable
in the T -expansion of M0 , then A is definable in T -expansion of M too.
   Proof – Let M (resp. M0 ) be the domain of M (resp. M0 ). Let A be a
subset of M0n for n ∈ N, with A definable in the T -expansion of M0 . Since M0 is
interpretable in the T -expansion of M , there are m ∈ N, a subset B of M m and
an equivalence relation R over B, with B and R definable in the T -expansion of
M , such that M0 = B/R. We denote by AM the preimage of A in (M m )n . Then
we have just to prove that AM is definable in the T -expansion of M .
   Let f be an isomorphism from M to another L 0 -structure M1 , and let N be
a model of T interpreting M1 . Then f induces an isomorphism f from M0 to
a structure MB with domain f (B)/f (R). Moreover, since the structure M0 is
interpretable in the T -expansion of M , then MB is interpretable in N . Now,
since f is an isomorphism from M0 to MB , then f (A) is definable in N . Thus
f (AM ) is definable in N , and A is definable in the T -expansion of M . 
   Nevertheless, by the following remark, this notion is not preserved in elementary
extensions.
Remark 3.8. – Let G̃ and G be as in Example 3.1 (1) and (2) respectively. Then
the pure group G̃ is an elementary extension of G. Moreover, if T denotes any
maximal torus of G, then its extension T̃ to G̃ is a maximal torus of G̃. But T is
definable in the ACF -expansion of the pure group G by Lemma 3.11 below, while
that T̃ is not definable in the ACF -expansion of the pure group G̃. Indeed, if α
is as in Example 3.1 (1), then α(T̃ ) is not Zariski closed (see Example 3.1 (1)),
so neither α(T̃ ), nor T̃ by Corollary 3.5, is definable in the ACF -expansion of the
pure group G̃.
     From now on, we study the abstract automorphisms of some algebraic groups.
Lemma 3.9. – Let K be an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero. Then
each abstract automorphism α of the group
                                                      
                               t a
                      G=                | t ∈ K ∗, a ∈ K
                               0 1
has the form α = β ◦ µ for µ a field automorphism of K, and β an inner automor-
phism of G.
                                                                   
                                            1 u                 u 0
   Proof – Let u ∈ K \ {−1, 0, 1}, x =              and y =             . Then we
                                            0 1                 0 1
have G = A o H for A = CG (x) and H = CG (y). In particular, A and H are
definable in the pure group G, and Fact 2.5 says that G interprets an algebraically
                   ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                           21


closed field L such that A is definably isomorphic to L+ and such that H is definably
isomorphic to a subgroup of L∗ , acting by multiplication on A. But, in the pure
field K, the fields K and L are definably isomorphic by Fact 2.6, so L∗ has no
                                                              ∗
proper infinite definable subgroup, and            H ≃ L definably.
                                         we obtain                     Hence the
                                   ∗        t a            ∗
groups G = A o H and L+ o L ≃                       | t ∈ L , a ∈ L are isomorphic,
                                            0 1
definably in the pure group G. Thus, by Fact 3.6 (or Fact 1.5), we have α = β ◦ µ
for µ a field automorphism of K, and β an algebraic automorphism of G.
    We show that β is an inner automorphism of G. Since H is abelian and self-
normalizing in G, it is a Cartan subgroup, and β(H) is a Cartan subgroup too.
Hence H and β(H) are conjugate, and we may assume that β stabilizes H. The
action of H on A \ {0} is transitive, so there exists h ∈ H such that β(x) = xh ,
and we may assume that β fixes x. Therefore, since A ≃ K+ is torsion-free of
dimension one, and since x is nontrivial, β centralizes A. Thus we have β(xy ) = xy .
                                               −1
But if β inverts H, then we have β(xy ) = xy , and y 2 centralizes x, contradicting
u 6∈ {−1, 0, 1}. Hence β does not invert H. Since H is a torus of dimension one, its
algebraic automorphisms are the identity map and the inversion map, so we obtain
β(h) = h for each h ∈ H, and β centralizes G = AH, proving the result. 

Lemma 3.10. – Let K be an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero. Then
each abstract automorphism α of the group
                                                          
                      t a u                                 
                  G =  0 t v  | t ∈ K ∗ , (a, u, v) ∈ K 3
                          0 0 1
                                                            

has the form α = βr,δ ◦ γ ◦ µ for µ a field automorphism of K, γ an inner auto-
morphism of G and βr,δ an abstract automorphism of G such that, for each t ∈ K ∗
and each (a, u, v) ∈ K 3 , we have
                                                            
                       t a u            t ra + δ(t) ru + δ(v)
              βr,δ ( 0 t v ) =  0            t        v     ,
                      0 0 1             0       0        1
where δ is a derivation of K and r an element of K.

   Proof – The unipotent part of G is its Fitting subgroup, so it is characteristic
                                                                                  
                                                            1 0 u                 
and definable in the pure group G, and its center Z =  0 1 0  | u ∈ K
                                                                0 0 1
                                                                                  
is characteristic
                and definable
                               too. Also
                                        the preimage in G of the center of G/Z
        1 a u                         
is U =  0 1 0  | (a, u) ∈ K 2 , so U is characteristic and definable in the
             0 0 1
                                      
pure group G. Moreover,  there is an
                                      isomorphism of  algebraic groups between the
                              t a
quotient group G/U and                 | t ∈ K ∗ , a ∈ K , and Lemma 3.9 shows that
                              0 1
the automorphism α of G/U induced by α has the form α = γ ◦ µ for µ a field
automorphism of K, and γ an inner automorphism of G/U . Hence we may assume
that α centralizes G/U , and we have just to prove that α has the form α = βr,δ ◦ γ
for γ an inner automorphism of G induced by an element of U .
22                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON


     We consider
                                                           
                         t a             0                   
                      C=  0 t            0  | t ∈ K ∗, a ∈ K .
                           0 0            1
                                                             


This subgroup is abelian and self-normalizing in G, so it is definable in the pure
group G, and it is a Cartan subgroup of G. In particular, C and α(C) are two
Cartan subgroups of V = U C = Z o C, and they are conjugate by an element of
Z ≤ U . Hence we may assume that α normalizes C and we have just to prove
that α has the form α = βr,δ ◦ γ for γ an inner automorphism of G induced by an
element of C ∩ U .
   The center of V is C ∩U , and there is an isomorphism of algebraic groups between
V /(C ∩ U ) and
                                                        
                                t a               ∗
                                          |t ∈ K , a ∈ K .
                                0 1

Then Lemma 3.9 shows that the automorphism α of V /(C ∩ U ) induced by α has
the form α = γ ◦ µ for µ a field automorphism of K, and γ an inner automorphism
of V /(C ∩ U ). Since U/(C ∩ U ) is the unique nontrivial normal abelian subgroup
of V /(C ∩ U ), it is characteristic in V /(C ∩ U ), and γ and µ normalize it. But V /U
is abelian, so γ centralizes it, and since α centralizes G/U , the field automorphism
µ centralizes V /U too. Furthermore, V /U is a torus of dimension one, hence µ is a
field automorphism centralizing K ∗ and, consequently, µ is the identity map. Now
α = γ is an inner automorphism of V /(C ∩ U ), and there exists      r ∈ K such  that,
                                                                         t a u
for each t ∈ K ∗ and each (a, u) ∈ K 2 , there is b ∈ K such that α( 0 t 0 ) =
                                                                         0 0 1
              
    t b ru
 0 t 0 . Moreover, since α normalizes C, the element b depends just on t
    0 0 1
and a, and there is a map ν0 : K ∗ × K → K such that for each t ∈ K ∗ and each
a ∈ K, we have:

                                                         
                       t a       0            t ν0 (t, a) 0
                   α( 0 t       0 )     =  0     t     0 .
                       0 0       1            0     0     1

                                                   
                           1 0 u                     
In addition, we have G0 =  0 1 v  | (u, v) ∈ K 2 , and α centralizes G/U ,
                              0 0 1
                                                     
so there is a map µ0 : K × K → K such that, for each (u, v) ∈ K 2 , we have

                                                                 
                       1 0      u             1       0   µ0 (u, v)
                   α( 0 1      v )      =  0       1       v     ,
                       0 0      1             0       0       1
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                              23


and µ0 satisfies µ0 (u, 0) = ru for each u ∈ K. Thus, for each t ∈ K ∗ and each
(a, u, v) ∈ K 3 , we have
                                                              
                  t a u                 1 0 u                t a 0
           α( 0 t v ) = α( 0 1 v ) · α( 0 t 0 )
                  0 0 1                0 0 1               0 0 1
                                      t ν0 (t, a) µ0 (u, v)
                               =  0        t         v     .
                                      0     0         1

    Byconsideringt ∈ K ∗ , (a, u,v) ∈ K 3 and  the equality α(xy)−1= α(x)α(y)
                                                                                     for
          t 0 0                        1 0 u                      1 t a 0
x =  0 t 0  (resp. x =  0 1 0 ) and y =  0                          1   0  (resp.
       0 0 1                         0 0 1                      0      0   1
          1 0 0
y =  0 1 v ), we obtain ν0 (t, a) = ν0 (t, 0) + tν0 (1, t−1 a) (resp. µ0 (u, v) =
          0 0 1
ru + µ0 (0,v)). Moreover,
                          by considering
                                           a ∈ K,and the equality α(xy) = α(x)α(y)
               1 a 0                     1 0 0
for x =  0 1 0  and y =  0 1 1 , we obtain µ0 (a, 1) = µ0 (0, 1) +
               0 0 1                     0 0 1
ν0 (1, a). Since we have µ0 (a, 1) = ra + µ0 (0, 1), this yields ν0 (1, a) = ra for each
a ∈ K, and ν0 (t, a) = ν0 (t, 0) + ra for each (t, a) ∈ K ∗ × K.
    Now we consider the maps ν : K → K and µ : K → K defined by ν(0) = 0 and,
for each t ∈ K ∗ and each v ∈ K, ν(t) = ν0 (t, 0) and µ(v) = µ0 (0, v). Then, for each
t ∈ K ∗ , (a, u, v) ∈ K 3 , we have
                                                                     
                      t a u                 t ra + ν(t) ru + µ(v)
                α( 0 t v ) =  0                   t          v       .
                      0 0 1                 0        0          1

Wenote that we have ν(1)
                        = 0 and µ(0) = 0. Moreover, if γ denotes the conjugation
     1 −r−1 µ(1) 0
by  0       1       0  ∈ C ∩ U , we obtain
     0       0       1
                                                        
                                1 0 0           1 0 0
                  (α ◦ γ −1 )( 0 1 1 ) =  0 1 1  ,
                                0 0 1           0 0 1

so we may assume µ(1) = 0, and we have just to prove that α = βr,δ for a derivation
δ of K.                                                                         
                                                                        t 0 0
   We consider t ∈ K ∗ and the equality α(xy) = α(x)α(y) for x =  0 t 0 
                                                                      0 0 1
            1 0 0
and y =  0 1 1 . Since µ(1) = 0, we obtain ν(t) = µ(t), and since ν(0) =
            0 0 1
0 = µ(0), we find ν = µ. From now on, we have just to prove that ν is a derivation
of K.
24                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON

                           0
   Firstly,
                   (v, v ) ∈ 
            for each              K 2 , by considering
                                                      the equality α(xy) = α(x)α(y) for
        1 0 0                         1 0 0
x =  0 1 v  and y =  0 1 v 0 , we find ν(v + v 0 ) = ν(v) + ν(v 0 ).
        0 0 1                         0 0 1
                             0         ∗ 2
   Secondly,   for each (t, t  ) ∈ (K   ), by considering
                                                       the equality α(xy) = α(x)α(y)
                                            t0 0 0
                       
              t 0 0
for x =  0 t 0  and y =  0 t0 0 , we find ν(tt0 ) = tν(t0 ) + t0 ν(t).
              0 0 1                         0 0 1
Since we have ν(tt0 ) = 0 = tν(t0 ) + t0 ν(t) as soon as t = 0 or t0 = 0, the map ν is
indeed a derivation, and this finishes the proof. 

Proposition 3.11. – We consider the group
                                                    
                     t a u                            
                                          ∗          3
               G =  0 t v  | t ∈ Q , (a, u, v) ∈ Q     .
                        0 0 1
                                                      

Then its maximal tori are definable in the ACF -expansion of the pure group G.

    Proof – We consider another algebraically closed field L, a pure group GL
interpretable in L, and an abstract group isomorphism µ : G → GL . We remark
that G has no proper subgroup of finite index, so the groups G and GL are connected
as pure groups aswell as algebraic
                               groups. We consider the subgroup H of G formed
                     1 0 u
by the matrices  0 1 0  for u ∈ Q. Then H is a normal definable subgroup
                     0 0 1
of the pure group G, since
                        it is the centralizer in G of the subgroup M formed by the
              1 a u
                                          3
matrices  0 1 v  for (a, u, v) ∈ Q . We may consider the groups H o G/M
              0 0 1
and G0 /H o G/M where G/M acts by conjugation on H and G0 /H: they are
definable in the pure group G because M = CG (H) is definable. Moreover, the
actions are transitive on H \ {0} and on G0 /H \ {0} respectively, and faithfull, so in
the pure group G, there are two interpretable fields K1 and K2 such that H (resp.
G0 /H) is definably isomorphic to (K1 )+ (resp. (K2 )+ ) (Fact 2.5). We note also
that, in the pure field Q, the fields K1 and K2 are definably isomorphic to Q (Fact
2.6).
    Now there are two fields L1 and L2 , isomorphic to K1 and K2 respectively, and
interpretable in the pure group GL , such that µ(H) (resp. µ(G0 )/µ(H)) is definably
isomorphic to (L1 )+ (resp. (L2 )+ ). So Fact 2.6 says that, in the pure field L, the
fields L1 and L2 are definably isomorphic to L. In particular, this proves that the
fields Q and L are isomorphic. Moreover, µ(G0 ) is an abelian group and, in the
pure field L, the groups µ(H) and µ(G0 )/µ(H) are definably isomorphic to L+ , so
µ(G0 ) is isomorphic to L+ × L+ , definably in the pure field L.
    We consider a maximal torus T of GL and its centralizer C. Then we have
GL = CG0L , so Z(C) ∩ G0L is central in GL . Since GL is centerless, Z(C) ∩ G0L is
trivial, and since C is nilpotent, we obtain GL = G0L o C. Since G0L is a maximal
abelian subgroup of GL , the group C ≃ GL /G0L acts faithfully by conjugation on
G0L , and C is isomorphic to an abelian definable subgroup of GL(2, L), definably in
the pure field L. Consequently, in the pure field L, there is a definable isomorphism
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            25


f from GL to a subgroup of
                                                                    
            t1 a u                                                    
              b t2 v  | (t1 , t2 , a, b, u, v) ∈ L6 , t1 t2 − ab 6= 0 ,
                0 0 1
                                                                      

such that
      • f (µ(H)) is formed by the matrices where t1 = t2 = 1 and a = b = v = 0;
      • f (G0L ) = f (µ(G0 )) by the matrices where t1 = t2 = 1 and a = b = 0;
      • f (C) by some matrices where u = v = 0.
In addition, since µ(H) is normal in GL , we obtain b = 0 for each element of f (GL ).
Also, µ(M )/G0L is an infinite abelian torsion-free subgroup of GL /G0L , definable in
the pure group GL , so C ≃ GL /G0L contains a closed infinite torsion-free subgroup,
that is a nontrivial unipotent subgroup. Since the unipotent part of
                                                             
                       t1 a 0                                  
                         0 t2 0  | (t1 , t2 ) ∈ (L∗ )2 , a ∈ L
                            0 0 1
                                                               

has dimension one, it is contained in f (C), and we obtain
                                                               
 1 a 0                               t1 a 0                        
   0 1 0  | a ∈ L ⊆ f (C) ⊆  0 t2 0  | (t1 , t2 ) ∈ (L∗ )2 , a ∈ L .
     0 0 1                                  0 0 1
                                                                   

Since f (C) is abelian, has torsion, and is connected because it is isomorphic to
G/G0 which is radicable, this forces f (C) to be equal to
                                                      
                         t a 0                          
                           0 t 0  | t ∈ L∗ , a ∈ L ,
                             0 0 1
                                                        

and f (GL ) is equal to
                                                           
                      t a       u                            
                         0 t    v  | t ∈ L∗ , (a, u, v) ∈ L3 .
                          0 0    1
                                                             

Since the fields Q and L are isomorphic, we may consider a field isomorphism
δ : L → Q. Then δ ◦ f ◦ µ is an abstract automorphism of G, and Lemma 3.10
shows that δ ◦ f ◦ µ is a standard automorphism. So the image of any maximal
torus of G by δ ◦ f ◦ µ is a maximal torus of G. But δ is a field isomorphism, and
the isomorphism f is definable in the pure field L, so the preimage by δ ◦ f of any
maximal torus of G is a maximal torus of GL . Hence the image of any maximal
torus of G by µ is a maximal torus of GL . In particular, the image of any maximal
torus of G is definable in L. Thus, the maximal tori of G are definable in the
ACF -expansion of the pure group G. 

                          4. Unipotent groups over Q
   In this paper, we study the structures M = (G, · ,−1 , 1, · · · ) interpretable in a
pure algebraically closed field K, where (G, · ,−1 , 1) is a group. Such a structure is
said to be an ACF -group and, if p denotes the characteristic of K, M is said to be
an ACFp -group.
26                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON


   In particular, any ACF -group is a group of finite Morley rank, and each inter-
pretable group in an ACF -group is an ACF -group too. Also, in the pure field K,
any ACF -group G is constructible [28, §4.a], and there is an isomorphism definable
in the pure field K, between G and an algebraic group over K [28, Théorème 4.13].
   The connected component G◦ of an ACF -group G as a group of finite Morley
rank is not necessarily equal to the one G◦◦ of G as a constructible group. Indeed,
if p is a prime integer, the pure group K+ ⊕ Fp is connected as a group of finite
Morley rank, and it is not connected as a constructible group. However, by Lemma
4.1, the situation is different for ACF0 -groups. Then, in the rest of this paper, for
any ACF0 -group G, we will denote by G◦ its connected component as a group of
finite Morley rank, as well as a constructible group.

Lemma 4.1. – Let G be an ACFp -group for p a prime or zero. If G◦ 6= G◦◦ , then
p is a prime and G◦ /G◦◦ is an abelian p-group.
   Moreover, G has a normal definable connected subgroup I contained in G◦◦ such
that G◦ /I is an abelian p-group.

   Proof – We notice that, if p is a prime and if G is an ACFp -group such that
G◦ /G◦◦ is a nontrivial abelian p-group, then G◦◦ contains (G◦ )0 . Let I/(G◦ )0 denote
the image of the endomorphism f of G◦ /(G◦ )0 defined by f (x) = xn where n is
the index of G◦◦ in G◦ . Then I is a normal definable connected subgroup of G,
contained in G◦◦ and such that G◦ /I is an abelian p-group. Hence we have just to
prove that, if G◦ 6= G◦◦ , then p is a prime and G◦ /G◦◦ is an abelian p-group.
   We may assume G = G◦ and we proceed by induction on the Morley rank of G.
Let A be a G-normal definable connected subgroup of G◦◦ . If A 6= 1, the induction
hypothesis applied with G/A provides the result. Hence we may assume that G◦◦
contains no nontrivial G-normal definable connected subgroup. Then the Zil’ber’s
Indecomposability Theorem [5, Results 5.26 and 5.29] yields [G◦◦ , G] = 1. Now
Z(G) contains G◦◦ and it is a definable subgroup of finite index in the connected
group G, so G = Z(G) is abelian.
   If p = 0, we consider N = {g n | g ∈ G} where n = |G/G◦◦ |. It is a connected
definable subgroup of the pure group G contained in G◦◦ , and the previous para-
graph gives N = 1. Thus G has bounded exponent, and since G is a constructible
group defined over an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero, it is finite.
But G is connected, so G = 1, contradicting G 6= G◦◦ .
   From now on, p is a prime. We denote by R the smallest subgroup of G containing
G◦◦ such that p does not divide the index [G : R] of R in G. We show that G = R.
We consider N = {g n | g ∈ G} where n = |G/R|. It is a connected definable
subgroup of the pure group G contained in R. Thus, if N 6= 1, the induction
hypothesis applied with G/N shows that G/G◦◦ N is a p-group. Since G/N has no
nontrivial p-element, we obtain G = G◦◦ N = R as desired. If N = 1, then G has
bounded exponent m, and p does not divide m. Since G is an ACFp -group, it is
constructible, and for any integer r, any subgroup of exponent r is finite, unless
p divides r. But p does not divide m, so G is finite, and it is trivial since it is
connected, contradicting G 6= G◦◦ . Thus we have proved that G = R, and since G
is abelian, this implies that G/G◦◦ is a p-group. 


     The following notion is central for our paper.
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                             27


Definition 4.2. – A group of finite Morley rank is said to be definably linear (over
finitely many interpretable fields K1 , . . . , Kn ), if G has an interpretable faithful
linear representation over the ring K1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Kn .
   In other words, G definably embeds in H1 × · · · × Hn , where Hi is an affine
algebraic group over Ki for each i = 1, . . . , n.
   In this section, we prove our first theorem. Its proof is based on the previous
section and on a Hochschild-Mostow’s theorem (Facts 4.5 and 4.6).
Theorem 4.3. – Let G be a connected nilpotent algebraic group over Q. Then, in
the ACF -expansion of the pure group G, the quotient G/Z(G) is definably linear.
Remark 4.4. – This result fails when G is a nilpotent algebraic group over an
algebraically closed field K of characteristic zero not isomorphic to Q.
   Indeed, consider a nonzero derivation δ of K, the group
                                                                 
                         1 a b x
                                                                   
                                                                    
                          0 1 a y                              5
                                                                    
                  G=                      | (a, b, x, y, z) ∈ K     ,
                          0 0 1 z                                
                                                                   
                             0 0 0 1
                                                                   

and the group automorphism α : G → G defined for each (a, b, x, y, z) ∈ K 5 by:
                                                               
                 1 a b x            1 a b + δ(a) x + δ(y)
               0 1 a y           0 1        a      y + δ(z) 
               0 0 1 z ) =  0 0
            α(                                                 .
                                               1          z       
                 0 0 0 1            0 0        0          1
Then suppose toward a contradiction that G/Z(G) is definably linear in the ACF -
expansion of the pure group G. That is G/Z(G) is definably isomorphic to H1 ×
· · · × Hn , where Hi is an affine algebraic group over an interpretable field Ki for
each i (Lemma 5.6). Moreover, we may assume that, for each i 6= j, the fields
Ki and Kj are not definably isomorphic, and that Hi is not trivial. Since Hi is
a UKi -group for each i, and since G0 contains Z(G), Facts 2.15 and 2.20 provide
G = UK1 (G) ∗ · · · ∗ UKn (G), where ∗ denotes the central product, and Fact 2.16
gives G0 = UK1 (G)0 × · · · × UKn (G)0 . If, for some i, we have UKi (G)0 = 1, then
UKi (G) is central in G, contradicting that Hi is nontrivial. Since G is nilpotent,
this implies that Z(G) ∩ UKi (G)0 is infinite for each i. Since Z(G) is torsion-free
and of dimension one over K, its Morley rank is one in the ACF -expansion of the
pure group G too, and we obtain Z(G) ≤ UKi (G)0 for each i. Thus we find n = 1,
and G/Z(G) is definably linear over K1 .
     From now on, since K1 and K are definably isomorphic in the pure field K
(Fact 2.6), the definable subsets of G/Z(G) are precisely its constructible subsets.
In particular, for each constructible subset X/Z(G) of G/Z(G), the image of X by
any group automorphism of G is constructible too. But, if we set
                                                             
                           
                                1 0 0 x                        
                                                                
                                 0 1 0 0 
                                                              
                                                              2
                      X=                      | (x, z) ∈ K     ,
                           
                                0 0 1 z                       
                                                                
                                 0 0 0 1
                                                               

then X is constructible and X∩α(X) is not constructible, contradicting that G/Z(G)
is definably linear.
28                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


   Our study starts with the analysis of some automorphisms of algebraic groups.
The following theorem by Hochschild-Mostow, together with Lemma 4.7, has several
consequences very useful for us.
   An affine algebraic group is said to be conservative if the action of its algebraic
automorphism group on its algebra of polynomial functions is locally finite. Actu-
ally, by [22], a group G is conservative if and only if the holomorph of G inherit
an affine algebraic group structure with which it is the semidirect product, in the
sense of affine algebraic groups, of G and its algebraic automorphism group.

Fact 4.5. – [22, Theorem 3.2] Let G be a connected affine algebraic group over the
algebraic closed field F of characteristic zero. Then G is conservative if and only
if one of the following two conditions is satisfied:
     (1) the center of G is finite over its unipotent part;
     (2) the center of a maximal reductive subgroup of G has dimension at most 1.

   Actually, only a special case of this result will be used: when the group is
generated by its unipotent elements. Fortunately, for this particular case, we can
provide below a model theoretic proof for Fact 4.5.

Fact 4.6. – (Special case of Fact 4.5) Let K be an algebraically closed field of
characteristic zero, and let G be an affine algebraic group over K. If G is generated
by its unipotent elements, then there is an affine algebraic group of the form H =
G o A, where A is an algebraic subgroup acting faithfully on G by conjugation
and such that, for each algebraic group automorphism ϕ of G, there exists a ∈ A
satisfying ϕ(g) = g a for each g ∈ G.

   Proof – We may assume G 6= 1. We consider the pure language of fields. Then
G is an interpretable group and it has a finite Morley rank. Moreover, G × G
definably embeds in L = GL m (K) for a positive integer m. Since there is finitely
many Jordan decompositions for unipotent elements in L, there is a finite subset X
of nontrivial unipotent elements of G × G such that each element of the set U of
the nontrivial unipotent elements of G × G is conjugate in L with a unique element
of X. For each x ∈ X, let Vx = d(x). Since each x ∈ X is nontrivial and unipotent,
Vx is definably isomorphic to K+ . Thus F = {Vxg | (x, g) ∈ X × L, xg ∈ G × G} is
a uniformly definable family of subgroups of G × G such that V1 ∩ V2 = 1 for each
distinct elements V1 and V2 of F . Moreover, for each x ∈ X, the subgroup Vx is
unipotent, so all the elements of ∪F are unipotent and, by choice of X, we have
∪F = U ∪ {1}.
   We consider n nontrivial unipotent elements u1 , · · · , un of G, such that ui+1 6∈
d(u1 , · · · , ui ) for each i < n, and such that G = d(u1 , · · · , un ). The existence of
n is ensured by the Zil’ber Indecomposability Theorem ([28, Theorem 2.9] or [5,
Theorem 5.26]), and because, for each nontrivial unipotent element u of G, the
subgroup d(u) is definably isomorphic to K+ , so it is connected. In particular, we
notice that G is connected.
   From now on, by the Zil’ber Indecomposability Theorem, there is an integer k
such that, for any elements F1 , · · · , Fn of F , the product (F1 · · · Fn )k is a subgroup
of G × G. In particular, the family H0 of these products is a uniformly definable
family of subgroups of G × G. Let

     H = {F ∈ H0 | rk(F ) = rk(G), F ∩ (G × {1}) = 1, F ∩ ({1} × G) = 1}.
                     ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                                29


Then H is a uniformly definable family of subgroups of G × G, and since rk(F ) =
rk(G) for each F ∈ H , the connectedness of G implies that each element of H is
the graph of an algebraic group automorphism of G. Conversely, if α is an algebraic
group automorphism of G, then for each i, the element (ui , α(ui )) is nontrivial
and unipotent, so d((ui , α(ui ))) ∈ F . Moreover, the graph ∆ of α contains the
subgroup H ∈ H0 generated by the subgroups d((ui , α(ui ))) for i = 1, · · · , n. But
we have G = d(u1 , · · · , un ), so there is a definable surjection from H to G, and
rk(H) ≥ rk(G). Since ∆ contains H, we obtain rk(H) = rk(∆) = rk(G) and
H ∈ H . Now, since ∆ is the graph of an automorphism of G, it is connected, so
∆ = H belongs to F . This proves that H is the set of graphs of the algebraic
group automorphisms of G. In particular the group Autalg (G) of all the algebraic
group automorphisms of G is interpretable in K.
   Furthermore, our argument proves that each ϕ ∈ Autalg (G) is characterized by
ϕ(u1 ), · · · , ϕ(un ), so the multiplication in Autalg (G) is interpretable too, as well
as its action over G. Thus, there is an algebraic group of the form G o A, where A
is an algebraic subgroup acting faithfully on G by conjugation and such that, for
each ϕ ∈ Autalg (G), there exists a ∈ A satisfying ϕ(g) = g a for each g ∈ G.
   From now on, we have to show that the algebraic group G o A is affine. Since
G∗ = G o A◦ is connected and since A◦ ∩ Z(G∗ ) = 1, the group A◦ is affine by the
Rosenlicht’s Theorem [31, §5, Theorem 13]. Then G∗ is affine by [31, §5, Theorem
16 p.439], and G o A is affine too by [31, §5, Corollary 1 p.430], as desired. 

Lemma 4.7. – Let K be a field of finite Morley rank of characteristic zero, and let
G be an affine algebraic group over K. If G is generated by its unipotent elements,
then any definable automorphism of G is an algebraic automorphism.

    Proof – We may assume G 6= 1. For any nontrivial unipotent element u of G,
the subgroup d(u) is contained in the Zariski closure hui of hui, which is definably
isomorphic to K+ . By Fact 2.7, we obtain d(u) = hui, and d(u) is closed and
connected (as an algebraic group, as well as a group of finite Morley rank). Let
u1 , · · · , un be n nontrivial unipotent elements of G such that ui+1 6∈ d(u1 , · · · , ui )
for each i < n, and such that G = d(u1 , · · · , un ). The existence of n is ensured
since d(u) is connected for each unipotent element u, and by the finiteness of the
Morley rank of G.
    Let α be a definable automorphism of G. We show that α is an algebraic group
automorphism of G. Let ∆α be the graph of α. Then ∆α is a definable subgroup
of G × G, and it is definably isomorphic to G. In particular ∆α is connected
(as a group of finite Morley rank). But G = d(u1 , · · · , un ), so we have ∆α =
d(h(ui , α(ui )) | i = 1, · · · , ni). For each i = 1, . . . , n, the subgroup d(ui , α(ui ))
is contained in h(ui , α(ui ))i, which is definably isomorphic to K+ . So we obtain
d(ui , α(ui )) = h(ui , α(ui ))i (Fact 2.7), and ∆α contains ∆0 = hh(ui , α(ui ))i | i =
1, · · · , ni. Since h(ui , α(ui ))i is a connected closed subgroup for each i, the group
∆0 is connected and closed too. In particular, it is definable. But it is contained in
∆α , and it contains (ui , α(ui )) for each i, hence it is equal to ∆α , and ∆α is closed.
Thus, the automorphism α is interpretable in the pure field K, and α is algebraic.


Corollary 4.8. – Let G be a group of finite Morley rank interpreting a field K of
characteristic zero. We assume that G acts faithfully and definably on an affine
30                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON


algebraic group U over K. If U is generated by its unipotent elements, then U o G
is definably isomorphic to a definable subgroup of an affine algebraic group over K.
   Proof – By Fact 4.5 or 4.6, there is an affine algebraic group of the form
H = U o A for a closed subgroup A, such that H is isomorphic to the holomorph of
U . By Lemma 4.7, each element of G acts on U by algebraic group automorphism,
so there is a definable isomorphism from G to a definable subgroup of A. 
Proposition 4.9. – Let G be a nilpotent group of finite Morley rank interpreting
a field K of characteristic zero. Then G has a largest definable subgroup definably
isomorphic to a unipotent algebraic group over K.
   Proof – We may assume that G is connected. We proceed by induction on
the Morley rank of G. Let N be a definable subgroup, maximal among the ones
definably isomorphic to a unipotent algebraic group over K. We may assume N < G
and we consider a maximal proper definable subgroup M of G containing N . By
induction hypothesis, N is definably characteristic in M , so N is normal in G.
   Let U be a definable subgroup of G definably isomorphic to a unipotent algebraic
group over K. We may assume that N does not contain U and that U is minimal
for these conditions. Then, by induction hypothesis, we have G = N U . Also, U has
a normal definable subgroup V such that V is definably isomorphic to a unipotent
algebraic group over K, and such that U = V o A for a definable subgroup A
definably isomorphic to K+ . By minimality of U , N contains V and, finally, we
have U = A ≃ K+ . Hence, by Fact 2.7, we have G = N o U , and either CU (N ) = 1
or CU (N ) = U .
   In the first case, Corollary 4.8 gives the result. In the second case, G is definably
isomorphic to N × K+ , so we have the result too. 
   In the pure language of fields, if A is an indecomposable unipotent algebraic
group over a field K of characteristic zero, then J(A) = 1. This remark induces
the following notion.
Notation 4.10. – In each group G of finite Morley rank, we consider
V (G) = hJ(A) | A is a radicable indecomposable definable abelian subgroup of Gi.
Remark 4.11. –
   • By the Zil’ber Indecomposability Theorem, for each group G of finite Mor-
     ley rank, V (G) is definable and connected.
   • Moreover, by Fact 2.11, V (G/H) = V (G)H/H for every normal definable
     subgroup H of G.
Lemma 4.12. – Let G be a nilpotent group of finite Morley rank, and let K be
an interpretable field of characteristic zero such that G is a UK -group. Then G is
definably isomorphic to a unipotent algebraic group over K if and only if V (G) = 1.
   Moreover, in this case, G is a homogeneous UK -group.
   Proof – First we assume that G is definably isomorphic to a unipotent algebraic
group G̃ over K. Then each nontrivial indecomposable definable abelian subgroup
A of G̃ is contained in a closed subgroup B definably isomorphic to K+ . So Fact
2.7 yields A = B and J(A) = 1, and we have V (G̃) = 1 and V (G) = 1. Now each
indecomposable subgroup of G is a UK -group, so G is a homogeneous UK -group.
   If V (G) = 1, we proceed by induction on the rank of G. We may assume G 6= 1.
Let M be a maximal proper connected definable subgroup of G. Then we have
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                             31


V (M ) ≤ V (G) = 1 and, by induction hypothesis, M is definably isomorphic to a
unipotent algebraic group over K. Since G is a UK -group, there is an indecom-
posable definable abelian subgroup A of G not contained in M such that A/J(A)
is definably isomorphic to K+ . In particular, by the maximality of M , we have
G = M A. On the other hand, since J(A) ≤ V (G) is trivial, A is definably isomor-
phic to K+ . Now Proposition 4.9 says that G = M A is definably isomorphic to a
unipotent algebraic group over K. 
Corollary 4.13. – Let G be a nilpotent UK -group of finite Morley rank for an
interpretable field K of characteristic zero. If there are finitely many algebraically
closed fields K1 , . . . , Kn such that G is definably isomorphic to a direct product of
unipotent groups U1 , . . . , Un over K1 , . . . , Kn respectively, then V (G) = 1.
  Proof – In this case, each nontrivial indecomposable definable abelian subgroup
A of G is contained in a definable subgroup B which is definably isomorphic to
(K1 )+ × · · · × (Kn )+ . So Fact 2.7 says that A is definably isomorphic to (Ki )+ for
some i and that J(A) = 1. In particular, this proves that V (G) = 1. 
  Now, by a relatively technical argument, we can prove Theorem 4.3, as a conse-
quence of the previous study.
   Proof of Theorem 4.3 – We proceed by induction on the nilpotence class of
G and on the Morley rank of G. By Fact 2.15, if T0 is the maximal pseudo-torus
of G, then G interprets some fields K1 , · · · , Kn of characteristic zero such that
G = T0 ∗ UK1 (G) ∗ · · · ∗ UKn (G), where ∗ denotes the central product, so G/Z(G) is
definably isomorphic to UK1 (G)/Z(UK1 (G)) × · · · × UKn (G)/Z(UKn (G)). But, if G
is not a UKi -group for some i = 1, . . . , n, then the induction hypothesis shows that
UKi (G)/Z(UKi (G)) satisfies the result for each i, so G satisfies the result. Hence
we may assume that G is a UL -group for an interpretable field L. In particular, by
Lemma 4.12, we have just to prove that V (G) is central in G, and we may assume
V (G)  Z(G). We note that, by Facts 2.18 and 2.21, G/Z(G) is a homogeneous
UL -group.
   If G has two distinct G-minimal subgroups A1 and A2 , we consider Zi /Ai =
Z(G/Ai ) for i = 1, 2. By induction hypothesis and Corollary 4.13, we have V (G) ≤
Z1 ∩ Z2 . Now V (G) is central in G, contradicting V (G)  Z(G). Hence G has a
unique G-minimal subgroup A.
   We denote by M the set of the maximal proper connected definable subgroups
of G. If there are two distinct elements M1 and M2 of M such that V (M1 ) and
V (M2 ) are contained in Z(G), then Proposition 4.9 and Lemma 4.12 show that
G/Z(G) = M1 M2 /Z(G) satisfies the theorem. Hence there is at most one element
MV of M such that Z(G) contains V (MV ). We denote by M ∗ the set of the
elements M of M such that Z(G) does not contain V (M ).
   For each M ∈ M , by induction hypothesis, Z(M ) contains V (M ). If Z(M ) does
not contain Z(G), then M does not contain Z(G). Moreover, since G is nilpotent
and connected, its torsion part is contained in its maximal torus, which is central in
G, so Z(G) is connected, and we have G = M Z(G) by maximality of M . But this
implies that Z(M ) = Z(G) ∩ M , so G/Z(G) is definably isomorphic to M/Z(M ),
and we obtain V (G) ≤ Z(G), contradicting V (G)  Z(G). Hence Z(M ) contains
Z(G) for each M ∈ M .
   Let M1 ∈ M . Since G is a UL -group, G/M1 is definably isomorphic to L+
(Facts 2.7 and 2.20). By Fact 2.11, G has an indecomposable subgroup I0 covering
32                               OLIVIER FRÉCON


G/M1 . Since G is nonabelian, we have G 6= I0 , and there exists M2 ∈ M containing
I0 . Therefore G/M2 is definably isomorphic to L+ , and G/(M1 ∩ M2 ) is definably
isomorphic to L+ × L+ . Let N = M1 ∩ M2 . Since Z(M1 ) ∩ Z(M2 ) centralizes
M1 M2 = G, the previous paragraph yields Z(G) = Z(M1 ) ∩ Z(M2 ). In particular,
N contains Z(G) and we have V (N ) ≤ V (M1 ) ∩ V (M2 ) ≤ Z(M1 ) ∩ Z(M2 ) = Z(G),
so N/Z(G) ≤ G/Z(G) is definably isomorphic to a unipotent group over L (Lemma
4.12). Moreover, since G/N ≃ L+ × L+ , we have V (G) ≤ N .
    If there exists M3 ∈ M does not containing N , then G/(N ∩ M3 ) is definably
isomorphic to L+ × L+ × L+ . Now we find N1 , N2 and N3 such that, for i = 1, 2, 3,
we have Ni = M1i ∩ M2i for some maximal definable subgroups M1i and M2i , and
such that G = hN1 , N2 , N3 i. By the previous paragraph, Ni contains Z(G) for
i = 1, 2, 3, the quotient Ni /Z(G) is definably isomorphic to a unipotent group over
L, and Proposition 4.9 shows that G/Z(G) is definably isomorphic to a unipotent
group over L too. Now Lemma 4.12 contradicts V (G)  Z(G). Hence each element
of M contains N . Moreover, we have G0 V (G) ≤ N and G/N ≃ L+ × L+ , and
G/G0 V (G) is definably isomorphic to a direct product of copies of L+ by Lemma
4.12, so the intersection of the elements of M is contained in G0 V (G). Hence we
obtain N = G0 V (G).
    We consider the subgroup Z defined by Z/A = Z(G/A). By induction hypoth-
esis, Z contains V (G), and G/Z is definably isomorphic to a unipotent group over
L (Lemma 4.12). For each z ∈ Z \ Z(G), the groups G/CG (z) and A are defin-
ably isomorphic, so we have CG (z) ∈ M , and N ≤ CG (z). Thus N centralizes Z.
Moreover, CG (z) ∈ M implies that A ≃ G/CG (z) is definably isomorphic to L+ .
We show that N contains Z. If G = Z, then we have N ≤ CG (Z) = Z(G), con-
tradicting V (G) ≤ N and V (G)  Z(G). Therefore Z is contained in an element
MZ of M . Since MZ ∈ M contains N , and since G/N is definably isomorphic
to L+ × L+ , either N contains Z or N Z = MZ . In the second case, let I1 be
an indecomposable subgroup of G such that J(I1 ) is not contained in Z(G). Let
x ∈ J(I1 ) \ Z(G). Then x belongs to V (G) ≤ Z, so CG (x) belongs to M and
CG (x) contains N . Moreover, we have x ∈ V (G) ≤ N , so x centralizes Z, and we
obtain CG (x) = N Z. But x centralizes I1 , hence I1 is contained in N Z. This shows
that each indecomposable subgroup I1 satisfying J(I1 )  Z(G) is contained in N Z.
Since G/N is definably isomorphic to L+ × L+ , there exists M ∗ ∈ M ∗ \ {N Z},
and we find an indecomposable subgroup I2 in M ∗ such that J(I2 )  Z(G). Con-
sequently, we have I2 ≤ N Z ∩ M ∗ = N , contradicting V (N ) ≤ Z(G). This proves
that N contains Z. In particular, since Z contains V (G), we obtain N = G0 Z.
    We show that Z/Z(G) is definably isomorphic L+ × L+ . Since we have Z(G) <
Z ≤ Z(N ), we have either CG (Z) = N , or CG (Z) ∈ M . We consider two distinct
elements H1 and H2 of M \ {CG (Z)}. For i = 1, 2, we fix hi ∈ Hi \ CG (Z), and
let γi : Z → A be the homomorphism defined by γi (z) = [z, hi ]. Then Z/CZ (hi ) is
definably isomorphic to A ≃ L+ . Thus, since we have G = N d(h1 , h2 ), we obtain
CZ (h1 , h2 ) = Z(G), and Z/Z(G) is either definably isomorphic to L+ , or definably
isomorphic to L+ × L+ . In the first case, for i = 1, 2, we have CZ (hi ) = Z(G),
so V (Hi ) is contained in Z ∩ Z(Hi ) = Z(G), and Hi belongs to M \ M ∗ . This
contradicts that M \ M ∗ has at most one element. Hence Z/Z(G) is definably
isomorphic L+ × L+ . Furthermore, if CG (Z) belongs to M , we consider g ∈
G \ CG (Z). Then CZ (g) centralizes d(CG (Z), g) = G, and we have Z(G) = CZ (g).
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            33


But the homorphism γg : Z → A defined by γg (z) = [g, z] is surjective by G-
minimality of A, hence Z/CZ (g) is definably isomorphic to A ≃ L+ , contradicting
that Z/Z(G) is definably isomorphic L+ × L+ . Thus CG (Z) does not belong to M ,
and we have N = CG (Z).
    By Fact 2.6, the fields Q and L are isomorphic, definably in the pure field Q.
Hence there is an isomorphism f , definable in the pure field Q, from G to a con-
nected nilpotent algebraic group GL over L. We consider the induced isomorphism
f : G/Z → GL /f (Z), and its graph ∆. In the ACF -expansion of the pure group G,
there is a definable isomorphism i between G/Z × GL /f (Z) and a unipotent group
U1 over L. Since, in the pure field Q, the fields Q and L are definably isomorphic,
there is an isomorphism j : U1 → U2 , definable in Q, from U1 to a unipotent group
U2 over Q, such that the preimage of each closed subgroup of U2 is a subgroup
of U1 , definable in the ACF -expansion of the pure group G. But (j ◦ i)(∆) is a
subgroup of U2 , definable in Q, so it is a closed subgroup of U2 , and ∆ is a subgroup
of G/Z × GL /f (Z), definable in the ACF -expansion of the pure group G.
    We consider the preimage ∆ of ∆ in G×GL . It is a definable subgroup of G×GL ,
and if ∆∗ is the graph of f , then we have ∆ = (Z × {1})∆∗ . Since G centralizes
Z/A and does not centralize Z, we have ∆0 = (A × {1})(∆∗ )0 . In the same way,
since G centralizes A, if ∆2 denotes [∆, ∆0 ], we have ∆2 = (∆∗ )2 . In particular,
∆2 ∩ (G × {1}) is trivial. We consider ∆/∆2 , and let Z∆ /∆2 be its center. Then
[∆, Z∆ ∩(G×{1})] is contained in ∆2 ∩(G×{1}) = 1, so Z∆ ∩(G×{1}) ≤ Z(G)×{1}.
If the nilpotence class of G is not 2, then the induction hypothesis applied with
∆/∆2 shows that V (∆) is contained in Z∆ . But GL is a unipotent group over
L, so we have V (GL ) = 1 and V (G × GL ) is contained in G × {1}. Hence V (∆)
is contained in Z∆ ∩ (G × {1}) ≤ Z(G) × {1}, and V (G) is contained in Z(G).
This contradiction implies that the nilpotence class of G is 2. In particular, G0 is
contained in Z(G) ≤ Z and we have N = G0 Z = Z.
    We show that M = M ∗ . Indeed, if MV exists, we consider M ∈ M ∗ . Then
Proposition 4.9 and Lemma 4.12 show that V (G) = V (M MV ) is contained in
V (M )Z(G). But we have Z = N = G0 V (G) = Z(G)V (G), so we obtain N =
Z(G)V (M ) ≤ Z(M ), and M ≤ CG (N ) = Z, contradicting our choice of M . Hence
we have V (M )  Z(G) for each M ∈ M .
    Now, for each g ∈ G \ N , we consider the map γg : G → Z(G) defined by
γg (x) = [g, x]. Since g 6∈ Z does not centralize N = Z and centralizes Z/A, we
have γg (N ) = A ≃ L+ and, since Z/Z(G) is definably isomorphic to L+ × L+ ,
the group CZ (g)/Z(G) is definably isomorphic to L+ . Moreover, since g 6∈ Z(G),
we have CG (g) < G and, since N ≤ M for each M ∈ M , we have CG (g)N < G.
Since g 6∈ N and since G/N is definably isomorphic to L+ × L+ , this implies that
CG (g)N/N is definably isomorphic to L+ . Now, if we consider h ∈ G \ CG (g)N ,
then we have CG (h)N/N ≃ L+ too, and since h ∈ CG (h) \ CG (g)N , Fact 2.7 gives
G = d(g)d(h)N . Thus, for each z ∈ CG (g, h), we have G = CG (z)N , Therefore,
since N is contained in each element of M , we have G = CG (z) and z ∈ Z(G),
so CG (g)/Z(G) ∩ CG (h)/Z(G) is trivial. On the other hand, again since N is
contained in each element of M , we obtain G = CG (g)CG (h), and G/Z(G) is the
direct product of CG (g)/Z(G) and CG (h)/Z(G).
    We fix g ∈ G \ N and h ∈ G \ CG (g)N . The previous paragraph shows that,
for any definable isomorphism α : CG (g)/Z(G) → CG (h)/Z(G), there is a definable
subgroup U/Z(G) of G/Z(G) representing the graph of α. We remark that, since
34                               OLIVIER FRÉCON


G/N is definably isomorphic to L+ × L+ , we have either U ≤ N , or U N/N ≃ L+
definably, or U N/N = G/N . Since G = CG (g)U and since G 6= CG (g)N , we have
not U ≤ N . Moreover, since N is contained in each element of M and since U < G,
we do not have U N/N = G/N , and we obtain U N/N ≃ L+ and U N ∈ M . In
particular, we have V (U N )  Z(G) and V (U N ) ≤ Z(U N ). We consider u ∈ U \N .
Since U N/N ≃ L+ , the subgroup CG (u)N contains U N , and since U N ∈ M , we
have either G = CG (u)N or CG (u) ≤ U N . In the first case, since each element of M
contains N , the group CG (u) is contained in no element of M , and we obtain G =
CG (u) and u ∈ Z(G), contradicting Z(G) ≤ N . Hence U N contains CG (u). Then
CG (u) centralizes V (U N ), and since the previous paragraph gives CZ (u)/Z(G) ≃
L+ , we obtain CZ (u) = V (U N )Z(G) = V (U )V (N )Z(G). Also, since Z(G) contains
V (N ), we have CZ (u) = V (U )Z(G) ≤ U . But we have Z/Z(G) ≃ L+ × L+ , so
either U ∩Z = CZ (u) or U contains Z. Since we have U/Z(G)∩CG (g)/Z(G) = 1 and
CZ (g)/Z(G) ≃ L+ , U does not contain Z, and we obtain U ∩Z = CZ (u). Moreover,
since we have u ∈ U \N , we have CU (u)N/N 6= 1, and since the previous paragraph
gives CG (u)N/N ≃ L+ ≃ U N/N , we obtain CU (u)N/N = CG (u)N/N = U N/N .
In particular, we have CG (u) = CU (u)N ∩ CG (u) = CU (u)CN (u), and since U
contains CN (u), we obtain CG (u) ≤ U . Furthermore, since U ∩ Z = CZ (u), we
obtain U = CG (u)(N ∩ U ) ≤ CG (u) and U = CG (u).
   We note that, if u ∈ CG (g)N , then we have U N = CG (g)N because U N/N ≃
L+ ≃ CG (g)N/N , contradicting G = CG (g)U and C( g)N < G. Thus we have
u 6∈ CG (g)N and, in the same way, u 6∈ CG (h)N . In particular, the following
uniformly definable family F of subgroups of G/Z(G) contains the graph of each
definable isomorphism from CG (g)/Z(G) to CG (h)/Z(G):
               F = {CG (u)/Z(G) | u ∈ G \ (CG (g)N ∪ CG (h)N )}.
Conversely, for each u ∈ G \ (CG (g)N ∪ CG (h)N ), the quotient group G/Z(G) is
the direct product of CG (g)/Z(G) and CG (u)/Z(G), and also of CG (u)/Z(G) and
CG (h)/Z(G), so CG (u)/Z(G) is the graph of an isomorphism from CG (g)/Z(G) to
CG (h)/Z(G). Now the set I of the definable isomorphisms from CG (g)/Z(G) to
CG (h)/Z(G) is a (nonempty) uniformly definable family. But, if we fix r ∈ I , then
the set of the definable automorphisms of CG (g)/Z(G) is A = {r−1 ◦ s | s ∈ I },
and it is a uniformly definable family.
   We show that the Morley rank of A is 2. We note that, in the pure field Q,
we have rk(L+ ) = 1 (Fact 2.6), so we have rk(L+ ) = 1 in the ACF -expansion
of the pure group G too. Since there are some definable bijections between F ,
I and A , we have to prove that F has Morley rank 2. First we show that, if
CG (u)/Z(G) and CG (v)/Z(G) are two distinct elements of F , then CG (u) ∩ CG (v)
is contained in N , that is the elements of F are generically disjoint. The previous
analysis shows that, if we have v 6∈ CG (u)N , then CG (u) ∩ CG (v) = Z(G), so
we may assume v ∈ CG (u)N . Therefore CG (u)N/N ∩ CG (v)N/N is not trivial
and, since CG (u)N/N and CG (v)N/N are definably isomorphic to L+ , we obtain
CG (u)N = CG (v)N . Also, the previous study gives CZ (u) = V (CG (u)N )Z(G) =
V (CG (v)N )Z(G) = CZ (v). Since CG (u)/CZ (u) and CG (v)/CZ (v) are definably
isomorphic to CG (u)Z/Z = CG (v)Z/Z ≃ L+ , we have either CG (u) = CG (v) or
CG (u) ∩ CG (v) = CZ (u) = CZ (v) ≤ N . Hence the elements of F are generically
disjoint. Moreover, each element CG (u)/Z(G) of F has Morley rank
              rk(CG (u)/CZ (u)) + rk(CZ (u)/Z(G)) = 2rk(L+ ) = 2,
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            35


and ∪F contains G/Z(G) \ (CG (g)N/Z(G) ∪ CG (h)N/Z(G)) which is a generic
subset of G/Z(G). So the Morley rank of ∪F is rk(G/Z(G)) = rk(G/N ) +
rk(N/Z(G)) = 4rk(L+ ) = 4, and the one of A is rk(∪F ) − rk(CG (u)/Z(G)) = 2,
as claimed.
   The same reasoning applied in the pure field Q shows that the group A has
dimension 2 over Q too.
   In the pure field Q, the group CG (g)/Z(G) is definably isomorphic to Q+ ×
Q+ , since CG (g)/CZ (g) and CZ (g)/Z(G) are definably isomorphic to L+ ≃ Q+ .
Hence there is a definable embedding µ from the canonical semidirect product
CG (g)/Z(G) o A to (Q+ × Q+ ) o GL(2, Q), where GL(2, Q) acts by multiplication
on Q+ × Q+ , and such that µ(CG (g)/Z(G)) = Q+ × Q+ and µ(A ) is a closed
subgroup of GL(2, Q). By Lemma 4.1, the group µ(A ◦ ) is connected, and since A
has dimension 2 over Q, the group µ(A ◦ ) has dimension two. Let T be a maximal
torus of µ(A ◦ ). It is nontrivial since µ(A ◦ ) is a closed subgroup of dimension
two of GL(2, Q). First we assume that µ−1 (T ) is definable in the ACF -expansion
of the pure group G. Since T is nontrivial, there exists e1 ∈ Q+ × Q+ such that
          ∗
T ·e1 = Q ·e1 , and the subset V1 := (T ·e1 )∪{(0, 0)} = Q·e1 is an infinite subgroup
of Q+ × Q+ . Now either T centralizes (Q+ × Q+ )/V1 and V2 := CQ+ ×Q+ (T ) is a
complement of V1 in Q+ × Q+ , or T does not centralize (Q+ × Q+ )/V1 and we
                                                   ∗
find e2 ∈ (Q+ × Q+ ) \ V1 such that T · e2 = Q · e2 . In this last case, the subset
V2 := (T · e2 ) ∪ {(0, 0)} = Q · e2 is an infinite complement of V1 in Q+ × Q+ .
Thus, for i = 1, 2, the preimage µ−1 (Vi ) = (µ−1 (T ) · µ−1 (ei )) ∪ {µ−1 (0, 0)} of
Vi is definable in the ACF -expansion of the pure group G. Since V1 and V2 are
infinite and satisfy Q+ × Q+ = V1 ⊕ V2 , and since CG (g)/Z(G) has Morley rank two
then, for i = 1, 2, the subgroup µ−1 (Vi ) is torsion-free of Morley rank one and we
have CG (g)/Z(G) = µ−1 (V1 ) ⊕ µ−1 (V2 ). Since CG (g)/Z(G) is an homogeneous UL -
group, this implies that µ−1 (Vi ) is definably isomorphic to L+ for i = 1, 2, and that
CG (g)/Z(G) is definably isomorphic to L+ × L+ in the ACF -expansion of the pure
group G. But CG (h)/Z(G) is definably isomorphic to CG (g)/Z(G), and G/Z(G)
is the direct product of CG (g)/Z(G) and CG (h)/Z(G), so G/Z(G) is isomorphic
to (L+ )4 , definably in the ACF -expansion of the pure group G. This contradicts
V (G)  Z(G). Hence µ−1 (T ) is not definable in the ACF -expansion of the pure
group G.
   Since µ−1 (T ) is not definable in G, the group µ(A ◦ ) is not a torus, and since
it has dimension two while the maximal unipotent subgroups of GL(2, Q) have
dimension one, we have µ(A ◦ ) = P o T for P a maximal unipotent subgroup
of GL(2, Q). Moreover, since µ−1 (T ) is not definable in G, we have µ−1 (T ) <
CA ◦ (µ−1 (T )) and T < Cµ(A ◦ ) (T ), and since P is a torsion-free group of dimension
one, we obtain µ(A ◦ ) = Cµ(A ◦ ) (T ) and µ(A ◦ ) is abelian. Now T centralizes a
nontrivial unipotent subgroup of GL(2, Q), hence T is central in GL(2, Q) and it is
conjugate with the following subgroup of GL(2, Q):
                                                          
                                    t a            ∗
                          R=                 |t ∈ Q , a ∈ Q .
                                    0 t

Thus there is an isomorphism ν, definable in Q, from (Q+ × Q+ ) o µ(A ◦ ) to
H1 = (Q+ × Q+ ) o R, where R acts on Q+ × Q+ by multiplication, and such that
ν(T ) is the maximal torus of R. But there is an isomorphism γ, definable in Q,
36                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


from H1 to the following group
                                                              
                         t a u                                  
                                                ∗              3
                  H2 =  0 t v  | t ∈ Q , (a, u, v) ∈ Q           ,
                              0 0 1
                                                                
                                                     
                                t 0 0                  
                                                      ∗
and satisfying (γ ◦ ν)(T ) =  0 t 0  | t ∈ Q . Since µ−1 (T ) is not de-
                                    0 0 1
                                                       
finable in G, this implies that, in the ACF -expansion of the pure group H2 , the
maximal torus (γ ◦ ν)(T ) is not definable. This contradicts Lemma 3.7 and Propo-
sition 3.11, and finishes the proof. 

                           5. Definably affine groups
   Generally a quotient of a definably linear group of finite Morley rank by a normal
definable subgroup, even finite, is not definably linear (Example 5.1). In order to
overcome this obstacle, we introduce definably affine groups (Definition 5.2). Then
we obtain a structural result about the definably affine ACF -groups (Proposition
5.11). Moreover, we introduce two new subgroups A(G) and W (G) for any ACF -
group G (Corollaries 5.10 and 5.18). We notice that the subsections 5.1 and 5.2
concern all the ACF -groups, not just the ACF0 -groups, since we do not need
Lemma 4.1 in them. Furthermore, the following results will be used in §10 for
ACFp -groups when p is a prime.
Example 5.1. – We consider the pure group G = H1 × H2 , where H1 and H2 are
two copies of SL2 (K) for an algebraically closed field K of characteristic zero. On
the one hand, for i = 1, 2, the quotient Hi /Z(Hi ) is definably linear [28, Corollaire
4.16], and Hi is definably linear too (Proposition 5.15). Hence G is definably
linear. On the other hand, if i and j denote the involutions of Z(H1 ) and Z(H2 )
respectively, then G = G/h(i, j)i is not definably linear.
   Indeed, let µ be a nontrivial field automorphism of K, and let µ∗ be the auto-
morphism of H1 induced by µ. We consider the automorphism α of G defined for
each (h1 , h2 ) ∈ G by α((h1 , h2 )) = (µ∗ (h1 ), h2 ). Then, if ∆ is the graph in G of
an algebraic group isomorphism from H1 to H2 , and if ∆ := ∆/h(i, j)i denotes its
image in G, the intersection of ∆ and of α(∆) is not definable. So α(∆) is not
definable and α is not a standard isomorphism. Consequently, by Fact 3.6 (or Fact
1.5), the pure group G is not definably linear over one interpretable field. But if
G is definably linear over several interpretable fields, then Lemma 5.6 shows that
G is a direct product of two proper definable subgroups. This contradicts that each
nontrivial normal subgroup of G contains the central involution of G. Hence G is
not definably linear.
5.1. Definition and generalities.
Definition 5.2. – A group G of finite Morley rank is said to be definably affine (over
finitely many fields K1 , . . . , Kn , interpretable in G) if G is definably isomorphic to
a definable section of H1 × · · · × Hn , where Hi is an affine algebraic group over Ki
for each i = 1, . . . , n.
Remark 5.3. –
  (1) If G is a definably affine ACF -group, interpretable in the pure algebraically
      closed field K, then G is affine by [28, §4.e (2)] and Fact 2.6.
                     ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                              37


    (2) Every definable quotient and every definable subgroup of a definably affine
        group is definably affine too.
    (3) Consider an ACF -group G definably affine over one algebraically closed
        field L. By [28, §4.e (2)] and Fact 2.6, there is a definable isomorphism
        ρ : G → H for an affine algebraic group H over L, and any subgroup of
        H is definable in G if and only if it is closed. In particular, G is definably
        linear over L.
   Our first result is a remark concerning some definable fields isomorphisms. For
the fields of finite Morley rank and of characteristic zero, a result of the same vein
is known [18, Corollary 2.8].
Lemma 5.4. – Let K and L be two fields, definable in an ACF -group G. If one
of the following two conditions is satisfied, then K and L are definably isomorphic:
      • K+ and L+ are definably isomorphic;
      • K ∗ and L∗ are definably isomorphic.
    Proof – Let F be an algebraically closed field such that G is interpretable in
the pure field F . We may assume that K and L are infinite. Thus there is a field
isomorphism α : K → L, definable in the pure field F (Fact 2.6). If δ : K+ → L+
is a group isomorphism, definable in G, then µ = δ −1 ◦ α is a group automorphism
of K+ , definable in F . By Fact 2.6, the map µ is definable in the pure field K, so
α = δ ◦ µ is definable in G.
    If γ : K ∗ → L∗ is a group isomorphism, definable in G, we consider the map
β : K → L defined by β(x) = γ(x) for each x ∈ K ∗ and by β(0) = 0. Then
ν = β −1 ◦ α is a permutation of K definable in F , and ν is definable in the pure
field K (Fact 2.6). Thus α = β ◦ ν is definable in G. 
Corollary 5.5. – Let G be an infinite ACF -group. Suppose that K and L are two
interpretable fields such that G is definably affine over K (resp. L). Then K and
L are definably isomorphic.
   Proof – We may assume that G has no proper infinite definable subgroup.
Let HK (resp. HL ) be an affine algebraic group over K (resp. L) such that G is
definably isomorphic to HK (resp. HL ). By the minimality of G, the group HK
(resp. HL ) is definably isomorphic to either K ∗ (resp. L∗ ), or K+ (resp. L+ ). Now
Lemma 5.4 provides the result. 
Lemma 5.6. – Let G be an ACF -group, and let K1 , . . . , Kn be n infinite definable
fields, such that Ki is not definably isomorphic to Kj for i 6= j. For i = 1, . . . , n, we
consider an affine algebraic group Hi . Then, for each connected definable subgroup
U of H = H1 × · · · × Hn , we have U = (U ∩ H1 ) × · · · × (U ∩ Hn ).
   Proof – We assume toward a contradiction that U is a counterexample of
minimal Morley rank. Then, for each proper connected definable subgroup M0
of U , we have M0 = (M0 ∩ H1 ) × · · · × (M0 ∩ Hn ), so U has a unique maximal
proper connected definable subgroup M . For each i, we denote by ρi : U → Hi the
projection map from U to Hi . We may assume ρi (U ) = Hi 6= 1 for each i. From
now on, M = (M ∩ H1 ) × · · · × (M ∩ Hn ) is normal in H. Thus, if M 6= 1, we have
Hi ∩ M 6= 1 for some i, and H/Hi ∩ M is equal to H1 (Hi ∩ M )/(Hi ∩ M ) × · · · ×
Hn (Hi ∩ M )/(Hi ∩ M ). Then, in H/(Hi ∩ M ), the minimality of the Morley rank
of U gives
U/(Hi ∩ M ) = (U ∩ H1 )(Hi ∩ M )/(Hi ∩ M ) × · · · × (U ∩ Hn )(Hi ∩ M )/(Hi ∩ M ),
38                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


and U = (U ∩ H1 ) × · · · × (U ∩ Hn ), contradicting the choice of U , so M = 1.
    For each i, since ρi is definable, the triviality of M implies that each proper closed
subgroup of Hi is finite, so Hi is definably isomorphic either to (Ki )∗ , or to (Ki )+ .
Moreover, for each i, since ρi (U ) = Hi 6= 1, the kernel Ri of ρi is finite, and U/Ri
is definably isomorphic either to (Ki )∗ , or to (Ki )+ . Now R = hRi | i = 1, . . . , ni
is finite and, for each i, U/R is definably isomorphic either to (Ki )∗ , or to (Ki )+ .
Hence Lemma 5.4 yields a contradiction. 
Corollary 5.7. – Let G be an ACF -group, definably affine over interpretable fields
K1 , . . . , Kn . Then, for each i = 1, . . . , n, there is an affine algebraic group Hi
over Ki , such that G is definably isomorphic to U/F , for a definable subgroup U of
H1 × · · · × Hn , and a finite normal subgroup F of U .
   Proof – We may assume that Ki is not definably isomorphic to Kj for i 6=
j. Since G is definably affine, it is definably isomorphic to a definable section
U/F of H1 × · · · × Hn , where Hi is an affine algebraic group over Ki for each
i = 1, . . . , n. We may assume F ∩ Hi = 1 for each i. But Lemma 5.6 gives
F ◦ = (F ◦ ∩ H1 ) × · · · × (F ◦ ∩ Hn ) = 1, so F is finite. 
    From now on, we connect the notions of definably linear groups and of definably
affine groups.
    At first we note that, if G is both an ACF -group and an affine algebraic group
over an algebraically closed field K, then since any quotient of an affine algebraic
group by a normal closed subgroup is affine, it follows that the ACF -group G is
definably affine over one interpretable field if and only if it is definably linear over
one interpretable field.
Corollary 5.8. – Let G be an ACF -group, definably affine over interpretable fields
K1 , . . . , Kn . Then G has a finite normal subgroup E such that G/E is definably
linear over K1 , . . . , Kn .
   Proof – Let U/F and H1 , . . . , Hn be as in the previous result. We may assume
G = U/F . For each i, let Fi be the projection of F on Hi . Then E = (F1 × · · · ×
Fn )/F is convenient. 
5.2. The subgroup A(G).
Theorem 5.9. – Let G be an ACF -group. If G is generated by its connected
definably affine subgroups over interpretable fields K1 , . . . , Kn , then G is definably
affine over K1 , . . . , Kn .
    Proof – Let L be an algebraically closed field such that G is interpretable in
the pure field L. First we assume that G is generated by its connected definably
affine subgroups over an interpretable field K. We may assume that K is infinite,
therefore K is isomorphic to L, definably in the pure field L (Fact 2.6). Let ϕ be
an isomorphism from G to an algebraic group GK over K, definable in the pure
field L, and let ∆ be its graph. By the Zilber’s Indecomposability Theorem, G
is connected and there exist finitely many connected definably affine subgroups
R1 , . . . , Rm of G over K such that G = hRi | i = 1, . . . , mi. Since K and L are
definably isomorphic in L, for each i, the subgroup ϕ(Ri ) of GK is affine, and any
subgroup of Ri × ϕ(Ri ) is definable in G if and only if it is definable in L. In
particular, the subgroup Si = {(x, ϕ(x)) | x ∈ Ri } of ∆ is affine and definable in
G for each i. Moreover, for each i, since Ri is connected (in G), this implies that
                     ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                              39


Si and ϕ(Ri ) are connected in G. Consequently, the Zilber’s Indecomposability
Theorem says that ∆ = hSi | i = 1, . . . , ni is definable in G, so ϕ is definable in
G. Moreover, for each i, since ϕ(Ri ) is connected in G, it is connected in K too,
and GK = hϕ(Ri ) | i = 1, . . . , ni is an affine algebraic group. Hence G is definably
linear over K.
   For the proof of the result, we may assume that Ki is not definably isomorphic
to Kj for each i 6= j. For each i, we denote by Ui the (normal) subgroup of G
generated by the connected definable subgroups of G, definably affine over Ki . By
the Zilber’s Indecomposability Theorem, Ui is definable and connected for each i,
and the previous paragraph says that Ui is definably linear over Ki for each i. Now,
for each i 6= j, by the Zilber’s Indecomposability Theorem, [Ui , Uj ] is a connected
definable subgroup of Ui ∩ Uj , and it is definably affine over Ki (resp. Kj ). Hence
Corollary 5.5 yields [Ui , Uj ] = 1.
   We show that G is the central product of U1 , . . . , Un . By the Zilber’s Inde-
composability Theorem, G is connected and there exist finitely many connected
definably affine subgroups R1 , . . . , Rm of G such that G = hRi | i = 1, . . . , mi. By
Lemma 5.6 and Corollary 5.7, for each i = 1, . . . , n and each j = 1, . . . , m, there
is an affine algebraic group Hij over Ki , such that Rj is definably isomorphic to
Vj /Fj , for a definable subgroup Vj of H1j × · · · × Hnj , and a finite normal subgroup
Fj of Vj . Since Rj is connected for each j, we may assume that Vj is connected for
each j. Now, for each j = 1, . . . , m, Lemma 5.6 shows that Rj has some connected
definable subgroups S1j , . . . , Snj such that Rj = hSij | i = 1, . . . , ni and such that
Sij is definably affine over Ki for each i. Since for each i, j, the subgroup Sij is
contained in Ui , this shows that G is generated by U1 , . . . , Un . Since [Ui , Uj ] = 1
for each i 6= j, the group G is the central product of U1 , . . . , Un . Hence we find a
definable epimorphism from U1 × · · · × Un to G. Since Ui is definably linear over
Ki for each i, this finishes the proof. 
Corollary 5.10. – Any ACF -group G has a largest connected definably affine
subgroup denoted A(G).
  From now on, we can describe the structure of any connected definably affine
ACF -group.
Proposition 5.11. – Let G be a connected ACF -group. Suppose that G is definably
affine over the fields K1 , . . . , Kn , and that Ki is not definably isomorphic to Kj for
each i 6= j. For each i, let Gi be the largest connected subgroup of G definably linear
over Ki . Then the following conditions hold:
      • G is the central product of G1 , . . . , Gn ;
      • G has a nontrivial finite normal subgroup E such that G/E is the direct
         product of G1 E/E, . . . , Gn E/E; in particular Gi ∩ Gj is finite for each
         i 6= j;
      • {G1 , · · · , Gn } is stable by each automorphism of the ACF -group G.
   Proof – By Corollary 5.7, for each i, there is an affine algebraic group Hi
over Ki such that G is definably isomorphic to U/F , for U a definable subgroup
of H1 × · · · × Hn and a finite normal subgroup F of U . We may assume G =
U/F . Since G is connected, we may assume that U is connected, and Lemma
5.6 gives U = (U ∩ H1 ) × · · · × (U ∩ Hn ). In particular, U ∩ Hi is connected for
each i, and we may assume Hi ≤ U for each i. Now G is the central product of
H1 F/F, . . . , Hn F/F , and Hi F/F ∩ Hj F/F is finite for each i 6= j.
40                                    OLIVIER FRÉCON


    For each i, we consider Vi such that Gi = Vi /F . By Lemma 5.6, we have
Vi◦ = (Vi◦ ∩ H1 ) × · · · × (Vi◦ ∩ Hn ) for each i. In particular, Vi◦ ∩ Hj is connected
for each i, j. Thus, for each i, j, the subgroup (Vi◦ ∩ Hj )F/F ≤ Gi ∩ Hj F/F
is connected and definably affine over Ki (resp. Kj ). Hence Corollary 5.5 gives
Vi◦ ∩ Hj = 1 for each i 6= j, so Vi◦ is contained in Hi for each i. Since Gi contains
Hi F/F for each i, we obtain Gi = Hi F/F for each i. This proves that G is the
central product of G1 , . . . , Gn , and that Gi ∩ Gj is finite for each i 6= j.
    Moreover, Corollary 5.8 provides a finite normal subgroup E such that G/E is
definably linear over K1 , . . . , Kn , and Lemma 5.6 says that G/E is definably isomor-
phic to A1 × · · · × An for some affine algebraic groups A1 , . . . , An over K1 , . . . , Kn
respectively. Then Corollary 5.5 and Lemma 5.6 imply that Gi E/E is definably iso-
morphic to Ai for each i, and that G/E is the direct product of G1 E/E, . . . , Gn E/E.
    Let ϕ be an automorphism of the ACF -group G. We fix i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, and
we show that ϕ(Gi ) ∈ {G1 , . . . , Gn }. Then, as for Gi in G, there is an infinite
interpretable field L such that ϕ(Gi ) is the largest connected definable subgroup of
G, definably linear over L. If L is not definably isomorphic to Kj for each j, then
G is definably affine over K1 , . . . , Kn , L, and the previous paragraphs applied with
this situation give dim(G) = dim(G1 ) + · · · + dim(Gn ) + dim(ϕ(Gi )). On the other
hand, by the previous paragraph, we have dim(G) = dim(G1 ) + · · · + dim(Gn ), so
ϕ(Gi ) is finite. Since ϕ(Gi ) is connected, we obtain ϕ(Gi ) = 1, so Gi = 1 = ϕ(Gi ).
Hence we may assume that L is definably isomorphic to Kj for some j. Since ϕ(Gi )
is the largest connected definable subgroup of G, definably linear over L, we obtain
ϕ(Gi ) = Gj . This finishes the proof. 
Corollary 5.12. – Let G be an ACF -group, and let K be an algebraically closed
field interpreting G. Let T be a maximal torus of G viewed as an algebraic group
over K. Then T is definable in the ACF -group G.
   Proof – We may assume that G is connected as ACF -group. Let G1 , · · · , Gn
be as in Proposition 5.11. Then G is the central product of G1 , . . . , Gn , so there are
maximal tori T1 , . . . , Tn in G1 , . . . , Gn respectively such that T = T1 · · · Tn . Since,
for each i, the subgroup Gi is definably linear over one interpretable field, then Ti
is definable, consequently T is definable too. 
5.3. The subgroup W (G). We provide some crucial criterions for the ACF -
groups to be definably affine (Theorems 5.16 and 5.9). Moreover, similarly to
the existence of the subgroup A(G) in any ACF -group G (Corollary 5.10), we show
that any such a group G has a smallest normal definable subgroup W (G) such that
G/W (G) is definably affine, and that W (G) is connected when G is an ACF0 -group
(Corollary 5.18).
   In the proof of Corollary 5.14, we use the following result, due to A.V. Borovik
and G. Cherlin.
Fact 5.13. – [19, Proof of proposition 4.3] Let H be a normal definable subgroup
of finite index of a group G of finite Morley rank. Then G definably embeds in the
wreath product of H by G/H.
Corollary 5.14. – Let G be a group of finite Morley rank. If G◦ is definably affine
over interpretable fields K1 , . . . , Kn , then G is definably affine over K1 , . . . , Kn too.
   Proof – For each i = 1, . . . , n, let Hi be an affine algebraic group over Ki such
that G◦ is definably isomorphic to the definable section U/F of H = H1 × · · · × Hn .
                     ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                                41


Then the wreath product W of G◦ ≃ U/F by G/G◦ is definably isomorphic to a
definable section of the wreath product of H by G/G◦ , which is definably linear
over K1 , . . . , Kn . Since Fact 5.13 says that G definably embeds in W , we obtain
the result. 

Proposition 5.15. – Let G be an ACFp -group for p a prime or zero, and let E
be a finite normal subgroup of G. If p does not divide |E| and if G/E is definably
linear over an interpretable field L, then G is definably linear over L too.

    Proof – Let K be an algebraically closed field of characteristic p such that
the ACF -group G is interpretable in the pure field K. By Corollary 5.14, we may
assume that G is connected and infinite. Moreover, G/E is definably linear over
L, so G/E and G are affine over K by Fact 2.6, and we may assume that G is an
infinite subgroup of GL n (K) for an integer n. Since G/E is definably linear over
L, we find an algebraic group A0 over L definably isomorphic to G/E. Since G
is infinite, L is infinite too and L is isomorphic to K, definably in K by Fact 2.6.
Let α be a field automorphism from K to L, definable in the pure field K. We
consider A = α∗ (G) and B = α∗ (E), where α∗ is the isomorphism from GL n (K)
to GL n (L) induced by α. Then A/B is isomorphic to A0 , definably in the pure
field K. In the pure field K, for each i, the definable subsets of GL i (L) are the
images of the constructible subsets of GL i (K) by the isomorphisms αi∗ induced by
α. In particular A is definable in L and, for any isomorphism from A/B to A0 ,
definable in K, the graph ∆0 is definable in L too.
    Let Z = B × E, and let ∆ be the graph of the isomorphism u from A to G
induced by α∗ . Let v be an isomorphism from G/E to A0 definable in G. Then
u induces an isomorphism u from A/B to G/E, definable in K, and v ◦ u is an
isomorphism from A/B to A0 definable in K. By the previous paragraph, v ◦ u is
definable in L too. Thus, since v is definable in G, u is definable in G. This shows
that ∆Z is a subgroup of A × G, definable in G. Moreover, since Z is abelian and
finite of order |E|2 , the quotient ∆Z/∆ is abelian, finite, and p does not divide its
order. Now, by Lemma 4.1, we obtain (∆Z)◦ ≤ ∆, and ∆ is definable in G. This
proves that u is definable in G, so G is definably linear over L. 

Theorem 5.16. – Let G be an ACFp -group for p a prime or zero. Suppose that G
has a finite normal subgroup F such that G/F is definably affine over interpretable
fields K1 , . . . , Kn . If p does not divide n = |F |, then G is definably affine over
K1 , . . . , K n

   Proof – By Corollary 5.14, we may assume that G is connected. By Corollary
5.8, G has a finite normal subgroup E containing F such that there exists a definable
isomorphism ρ from G/E to a definable subgroup U of H = H1 × · · · × Hn , where
Hi is an affine algebraic group over Ki for each i. By Lemma 5.6, we have U =
(U ∩ H1 ) × · · · × (U ∩ Hn ).
   For each i, we consider Vi /E = ρ−1 (U ∩ Hi ). Then we have G/E = V1 /E × · · · ×
Vn /E and, for each i 6= j, we have [Vi , Vj ] ≤ E. Since Vi /E is connected for each
i and since E is finite, the Zil’ber’s Indecomposability Theorem [5, Corollary 5.29]
shows that [Vi , Vj ] = 1 for each i 6= j. Thus G is the central product of V1 , . . . , Vn ,
and there is a definable epimorphism f from V1 × · · · × Vn to G with a finite kernel.
Hence, by Corollary 5.14, we have just to prove that Vi◦ is definably affine over Ki
for each i. But, for each i, the quotient Vi◦ /(Vi◦ ∩ E) is definably affine over Ki , so
42                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


Corollary 5.5 and Lemma 5.6 show that Vi◦ /(Vi◦ ∩ F ) is definably affine over Ki .
Now Proposition 5.15 provides the result. 
Lemma 5.17. – Let G be a group of finite Morley rank. If G is residually de-
finably affine over interpretable fields K1 , . . . , Kn , then G is definably affine over
K1 , . . . , K n .
   Proof – We find finitely many normal definable subgroups S1 , . . . , Sm of G such
that ∩m
      i=1 Si = 1 and such that G/Si is definably affine over K1 , . . . , Kn for each i.
Then G definably embeds in (G/S1 ) × · · · × (G/Sm ), and the result follows. 
Corollary 5.18. – Let G be an ACFp -group for p a prime or zero. Then G has a
smallest normal definable subgroup W (G) such that G/W (G) is definably affine.
   Furthermore, W (G) is contained in G◦ and, either p = 0 and W (G) is connected,
or p is a prime and W (G)/W (G)◦ is a p-group.
   Proof – The existence of W (G) follows from Lemma 5.17. Since G/G◦ is defin-
ably linear over any finite field, we have W (G) ≤ G◦ . In particular, W (G)/W (G)◦
is a central subgroup of G◦ /W (G)◦ , and it is abelian.
   If p = 0, let H = W (G)◦ , and if p is a prime, let H/W (G)◦ be the largest
p-subgroup of W (G)/W (G)◦ . Then Corollary 5.14 and Theorem 5.16 show that
G/H is definably affine, so we obtain H = W (G), and this equality finishes the
proof. 

                              6. More on pseudo-tori
    In this section, we consider an algebraic group G over Q, and its pseudo-tori in
the ACF -expansion of the pure group G. Ideally, these subgroups are the tori of
G. However, even if G is centerless and connected, the maximal tori of the pure
group G may be not definable (Example 3.1 (2)).
    Our first result concerns the ACF -expansion of the pure group G, when G is a
connected centerless algebraic group over Q, with G solvable of class two (Propo-
sition 6.2). We should note that, by the main theorem of [16], such a group inter-
prets finitely many connected, solvable of class two and centerless algebraic groups
G1 , . . . , Gn over algebraically closed fields K1 , . . . , Kn respectively, in such a way
that G imbeds in G1 ×· · ·×Gn . However, contrary to what is announced, the embed-
ding in [16] is not necessarily definable. Indeed, otherwise the group G in Example
3.1 (2) would be definably linear, and since it is not a direct product of two proper
subgroups, it would be definably linear over one interpretable field (Lemma 5.6),
contradicting Example 3.1 (2).
    For the proof of Proposition 6.2 and of the main result of this section, that is
Theorem 6.3, we need Carter subgroups. These subgroups are defined in any group
of finite Morley rank as being definable, connected, nilpotent, and of finite index in
their normalizers. They have turned out to be increasingly useful in the analysis of
groups of finite Morley rank. In the algebraic groups over an algebraically closed
field, and when the language is the one of the pure fields, these subgroups are
precisely Cartan subgroups, namely the connected component of centralizers of the
maximal tori. The following fact is a summarize, in the solvable context, of their
properties useful for us. We refer to [21] for more details on Carter subgroups.
Fact 6.1. – Let G be a connected solvable group of finite Morley rank, and let N
be a normal definable subgroup of G. Then the following conditions are satisfied:
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                              43


     (i) [20, Corollary 2.10] any pseudo-torus of G lies in a Carter subgroup of G;
    (ii) [21, Theorem 3.11] its Carter subgroups are self-normalizing;
   (iii) [21, Corollary 3.3] the Carter subgroups of G/N are exactly of the form
         QN/N , with Q a Carter subgroup of G;
   (iν) [21, Proposition 3.19] if G is 2-solvable, then G has a definable connected
         characteristic abelian subgroup A of G such that G = AoC for every Carter
         subgroup C of G.
Proposition 6.2. – Let G be an algebraic group over Q. If G is connected, cen-
terless, and solvable of class two, then the ACF -expansion of the pure group G is
definably linear.
     Proof – We notice that, since G is connected and centerless, F (G) is torsion-
free. We suppose toward a contradiction that there exists a counterexample G of
minimal Morley rank. For i = 1, 2, let Ai be a G-minimal subgroup, let Zi /Ai be
the center of G/Ai , and let Wi be the hypercenter of G/Ai . Since G is connected,
Wi is definable for i = 1, 2 [28, Corollaire 3.15]. Moreover, since F (G) is torsion-
free, A1 and A2 are torsion-free too. Thus, if we have A1 6= A2 , then A1 ∩ A2 is
trivial, and Z1 ∩ Z2 ≤ Z(G) is trivial too, so W1 ∩ W2 is trivial. In this case, since
G/W1 and G/W2 are definably affine by induction hypothesis, G is definably affine
(Lemma 5.17). Hence G has a unique G-minimal subgroup A.
     Let C be a Carter subgroup of G. By Fact 6.1 (iii), we have G = G0 C. Then
Z(C) ∩ CC (G0 ) is central in G, so CC (G0 ) is trivial. Moreover, since G is 2-solvable,
C 0 centralizes G0 , so C is abelian. Hence C ∩ G0 is central in G, and we obtain
G = G0 o C.
     We show that, if A(G0 ) denotes the largest connected definably affine subgroup of
G (Corollary 5.10), we have A ≤ A(G0 ) < G0 , and that C/CC (A(G0 )) is definably
   0

linear over one interpretable field. By Facts 2.5, we have A ≤ A(G0 ). Moreover,
since G0 ≤ F (G) is torsion-free, A(G0 ) is definably linear by Corollary 5.8. So
the uniqueness of A and Lemma 5.6 show that A(G0 ) is definably linear over one
interpretable field K. Moreover, since G0 is torsion-free, K is of characteristic zero
and A(G0 ) is definably isomorphic to a unipotent algebraic group over K. Conse-
quently, Corollary 4.8 says that C/CC (A(G0 )) is definaly linear over K. Therefore,
if A(G0 ) = G0 , since CC (G0 ) is trivial, then C is definably linear over K. But, since
G is solvable, we have G0 H < G for each normal proper subgroup H of G, so the
conjugates of C generate G. Hence the condition A(G0 ) = G0 implies that G is
definably affine over K by Theorem 5.9. Thus we obtain A(G0 ) < G0 .
     We claim that G has a unique maximal proper normal connected definable sub-
group. Indeed, suppose that N1 and N2 are two distinct maximal proper normal
connected definable subgroups of G. In particular, N1 and N2 contain G0 , and G
is generated by N1 and N2 . We may assume that A is noncentral in N2 . Since
Z(N2 ) ≤ F (G) is torsion-free, and since it is normal in G and does not contains A,
it is trivial. Hence N2 is definably linear by induction hypothesis. Moreover, by the
maximality of N2 and since G is solvable, N2 contains G0 , therefore G0 is definably
linear. This contradicts the previous paragraph, so G has a unique maximal proper
normal connected definable subgroup N .
     We show that N = F (G). Indeed, we have F (G) ≤ N by the uniqueness of N .
Let B be a G-minimal section of G0 . If C centralizes B, then C covers B by Fact
6.1 (iii), contradicting G0 ∩ C = 1. So Fact 2.5 says that G/CG (B) ≃ C/CC (B) is
definably isomorphic to a subgroup of L∗ for an interpretable algebraically closed
44                                   OLIVIER FRÉCON


field L. But L and Q are definably isomorphic in the pure field Q (Fact 2.6), hence
L∗ has no proper connected definable subgroup, and CG (B)◦ is a maximal proper
connected definable subgroup of G. Then, by the uniqueness of N , we obtain
N = CG (B)◦ , and N centralizes each G-minimal section of G0 . This implies that
N is nilpotent, so N = F (G).
    We show that A = A(G0 ). We note that, since G is centerless and since A(G0 )
contains A, we have CG (A(G0 )) < G. So, by the uniqueness of N , the quotient
N CG (A(G0 ))/CG (A(G0 )) is the unique maximal proper normal connected definable
subgroup of G/CG (A(G0 )). But G/CG (A(G0 )) is abelian since G0 is abelian, and
G/CG (A(G0 )) ≃ C/CC (A(G0 )) is definably linear over K. Hence, since K and Q
are definably isomorphic in the pure field Q (Fact 2.6), the quotient G/CG (A(G0 ))
has dimension one over Q, and the uniqueness of N gives N = CG (A(G0 ))◦ . In
particular, since the unipotent part of G is contained in F (G) = N , it centralizes
A(G0 ), and G/CG (A(G0 )) is a torus. Moreover, A(G0 ) is a closed torsion-free abelian
subgroup of G, so it is a Q-vector space, and there is a base (a1 , . . . , an ) of A(G0 )
such that G normalizes Q · ai for each i. Then, since A(G0 ) is definably linear over
K and since K and Q are definably isomorphic in the pure field Q, the subgroups
Q·ai are definable and normal in G for each i. So we obtain n = 1 by the uniqueness
of A, and A(G0 ) is definably isomorphic to K+ . Now Fact 2.7 gives A(G0 ) = A, as
desired.
    We show that AC is the unique maximal proper connected definable subgroup of
G containing C. Indeed, if G = AC, then we have G0 = A = A(G0 ), contradicting
A(G0 ) < G0 . Let M be a maximal proper connected definable subgroup M of G
containing C. Since AC is proper in G, we have C < M . Then M ∩ G0 is a
normal infinite definable subgroup of G, and we have A ≤ M by the uniqueness
of A. Let Z be the hypercenter of M . It is definable by [28, Corollaire 3.15], and
it is contained in C by Fact 6.1 (ii). In particular, Z ∩ G0 is trivial. Moreover, by
induction hypothesis, M/Z is definably linear, so M ∩ G0 is definably linear, and
the previous paragraph gives M ∩ G0 ≤ A(G0 ) = A. Now we have M = AC, as
claimed.
    From now on, we can prove that the maximal tori of G are definable. Indeed,
by the maximality of AC and since A < G0 , the quotient G0 /A is C-minimal. Since
G = G0 o C, Fact 6.1 (iii) says that C does not centralize G0 /A, and Fact 2.5
provides an infinite interpretable field K1 such that G0 /A is definably isomorphic
to (K1 )+ . Then Fact 2.6 shows that G0 /A is isomorphic to Q+ , definably in Q.
Since A ≃ Q · a1 is isomorphic to Q+ , definably in Q too, G0 is isomorphic to a
Q-vector space of dimension two, definably in Q. Thus, since CC (G0 ) is trivial, C
is isomorphic, definably in Q, to an abelian connected closed subgroup of
                                                            
                             s   a                  ∗ 2
                                         | (s, t) ∈ (Q ) , a ∈ Q .
                             0   t

In particular, C has dimension at most two over Q. Since C/CC (A) is definably
linear over K, Proposition 5.15 says that C/CC (A)◦ is definably linear over K too.
Thus, since the conjugates of C generate G, and since G is not definably affine
over K, Theorem 5.9 shows that CC (A)◦ is nontrivial, so C has dimension exactly
two over Q. Moreover, CC (A)◦ ≤ N = F (G) is torsion-free, so it is a unipotent
subgroup, and C is not a torus. This implies that C is isomorphic, definably in Q,
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                           45


to                                                   
                                t a            ∗
                                          |t ∈ Q , a ∈ Q .
                                0 t
Consequently, G = G0 o C is isomorphic, definably in Q, to
                                                       
                   t a u                                 
                     0 t v  | t ∈ Q∗ , (a, u, v) ∈ Q3 ,
                       0 0 1
                                                         

and Lemma 3.7 and Proposition 3.11 say that the maximal tori of G are definable.
   Let T be the maximal torus of C. Since C ∩ N ≤ F (G) is torsion-free, C ∩ N
is a unipotent subgroup. On the other hand, the unipotent part of C is contained
in the one of G, which is contained in F (G) = N , so we obtain C = (C ∩ N ) × T .
Actually, since N = F (G) is torsion-free, it is the unipotent part of G, and since
G = G0 C = N C = N o T , the torus T is maximal in G. Consequently, by the
previous paragraph, it is definable, and G0 T is definable too. But, since G =
G0 o C and since C ∩ N = CC (A)◦ is nontrivial, G0 T is a proper normal connected
definable subgroup of G. Hence G0 T is contained in N by the uniqueness of N .
This contradicts G = N o T , and finishes the proof. 
     From now on, we are going to prove the following fundamental result.
Theorem 6.3. – Let G be a connected solvable algebraic group over Q. Then
T ∩ F (G) is central in G for each pseudo-torus T of the ACF -expansion of the pure
group G.
   First, we have to prove Lemma 6.5. Its proof uses the Frattini subgroup, which
is defined for any group G of finite Morley rank, as being the intersection of all the
maximal proper definable connected subgroups of G. It is denoted by Φ(G).
Fact 6.4. – Let G be a connected group of finite Morley rank. Then,
    (i) [21, Lemma 2.14.b] if H is a definable subgroup of G such that G = Φ(G)H,
        we have G = H;
   (ii) [21, Lemma 2.14.a] Φ(G/Φ(G)) is trivial;
  (iii) [21, Proposition 3.18] if G is solvable, Φ(G) is nilpotent and the quotient
        F (G)/Φ(G) = F (G/Φ(G)) is abelian. In particular, G/Φ(G) is 2-solvable,
        and G is nilpotent if and only if G/Φ(G) is abelian;
  (iν) [21, Proposition 6.5] if G is solvable, F (G) ∩ Φ(C) ≤ Φ(G) for each Carter
        subgroup C of G;
   (ν) [19, Lemma 5.4] if G is nilpotent and if Φ(G) is finite, Φ(G/A) is finite for
        each normal definable subgroup A of G.
Lemma 6.5. – Let C be a nilpotent group of finite Morley rank, and T a pseudo-
torus of C. Then, for each connected definable subgroup A of T , the quotient
AΦ(C)/Φ(C) is a pseudo-torus.
   Proof – By Facts 2.10 (iν) and 6.4 (ii), we may assume Φ(C) = 1. In particular
C is abelian (Fact 6.4 (iii)). We assume toward a contradiction that A is not a
pseudo-torus. Since T is abelian and radicable, then A is abelian and radicable too,
and it has a definable normal subgroup B such that A/B is definably isomorphic to
K+ for an interpretable field K. Moreover, since A is radicable, the characteristic of
K is zero, and A/B has no nontrivial proper definable subgroup (Fact 2.7). Since
Φ(C/B) is finite (Fact 6.4 (ν)), there is a maximal proper connected definable
46                                OLIVIER FRÉCON


subgroup M/B of C/B does not containing A/B. In particular, since A/B has
no nontrivial proper definable subgroup, we have A ∩ M = B. Moreover, by
maximality of M/B, we have C = M A = M T , and K+ ≃ A/B = A/(A ∩ M )
is definably isomorphic to T /(T ∩ M ), contradicting that T is a pseudo-torus. This
finishes the proof. 

     From now on, we can prove Theorem 6.3.

    Proof – [Proof of Theorem 6.3] We assume toward a contradiction that G is a
counterexample of minimal Morley rank and with Z(G) of minimal Morley degree.
We may assume that T is a maximal pseudo-torus of G. We show that no proper
normal definable subgroup of G contains T . Indeed, suppose toward a contradiction
that M is a proper normal definable subgroup of G containing T . Then M ◦ contains
T since T is connected, and T ∩F (M ◦ ) is central in M ◦ by the minimality of rk(G).
But we have G = M NG (T ) by Fact 2.10 (i) and a Frattini Argument, therefore by
Fact 2.10 (ii) and since G is connected, we find G = M ◦ CG (T ). Hence we obtain
T ∩ F (M ◦ ) ≤ Z(G). Since M is normal in G, we have F (M ◦ ) = M ◦ ∩ F (G), so
T ∩ F (G) is central in G, contradicting the choice of G. This proves that no proper
normal definable subgroup of G contains T . In particular, we have G = G0 T .
    We show that Z(G) = 1. By Fact 2.10 (iν), T Z(G)/Z(G) is a pseudo-torus of
G/Z(G). Consequently, if Z(G) is infinite, the minimality of rk(G) implies that
(T ∩ F (G))Z(G)/Z(G) is central in G/Z(G), so CG (t) is a normal subgroup of G
for each t ∈ T ∩ F (G). Now the previous paragraph gives G = CG (t) for each
t ∈ T ∩ F (G), that is T ∩ F (G) ≤ Z(G), which contradicts our hypothesis. Thus
Z(G) is finite and, since G is connected, G/Z(G) is centerless. If Z(G) 6= 1, the
minimality of the Morley degree of Z(G) yields (T ∩ F (G))Z(G)/Z(G) = 1 and
T ∩ F (G) ≤ Z(G), contradicting our hypothesis on G, so G is centerless.
    We show that F (G) is torsion-free. Indeed, for each prime p, since Q has char-
acteristic zero and since F (G) is nilpotent, the subset Fp of the elements of order p
in F (G) is finite. Then, since G is connected and normalizes Fp , it centralizes Fp ,
and we obtain Fp = ∅ because Z(G) = 1. This proves that F (G) is torsion-free.
Furthermore, this implies that F (G) is a unipotent subgroup of G.
    By Fact 6.1 (i), T is contained in a Carter subgroup C of G. We show that Φ(C)
contains T ∩ F (G). Since F (G) is torsion-free, T ∩ F (G) is connected. By Lemma
6.5, the group (T ∩ F (G))Φ(C)/Φ(C) is a pseudo-torus, and Fact 2.10 (iν) yields
a pseudo-torus T0 of T ∩ F (G) such that T0 Φ(C) = (T ∩ F (G))Φ(C). By Fact
2.10 (iii), we have T0 ≤ Z(G) = 1, so (T ∩ F (G))Φ(C)/Φ(C) = 1 and T ∩ F (G) is
contained in Φ(C). In particular, T ∩ F (G) is contained in Φ(G) (Fact 6.4 (iν)).
    We show that T is contained in a unique maximal proper definable connected
subgroup M of G. Indeed, since T < G, the subgroup M exists. Moreover, we
have T ∩ F (M ) ≤ Z(M ) by the minimality of rk(G). Since M contains Φ(G) by
the definition of Φ(G), and since Φ(G) is nilpotent (Fact 6.4 (iii)), we have Φ(G) ≤
F (M ) and the previous paragraph yields T ∩F (G) ≤ T ∩F (M ) ≤ Z(M ). Thus, if T
is contained in two distinct maximal proper definable connected subgroups M1 and
M2 of G, then T ∩F (G) centralizes hM1 , M2 i = G, contradicting T ∩F (G)  Z(G).
Hence we obtain the uniqueness of M .
    We consider Z/G00 = Z(G/G00 ), G = G/Z and T = T Z/Z. We show that
       0
G = G o T and that G is centerless. If G00 = 1 then, since G is centerless, we have
Z = 1 and Z(G) = 1. Moreover G0 and T are abelian and, since the first paragraph
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                               47

                                                                                   0
gives G = G0 T , we obtain G0 ∩ T ≤ Z(G) = 1, so G = G0 o T and G = G o T .
Hence we may assume G00 6= 1. In particular, the minimality of rk(G) yields
T G00 /G00 ∩ F (G/G00 ) ≤ Z/G00 . But Fact 6.4 (iii) gives G00 ≤ Φ(G) ≤ F (G) and
F (G/Φ(G)) = F (G)/Φ(G), hence we have F (G/G00 ) = F (G)/G00 and we obtain
T ∩ F (G) ≤ Z. Also, the equalities Z/G00 = Z(G/G00 ) and F (G/G00 ) = F (G)/G00
imply Z ≤ F (G) and F (G) = F (G)/Z, so we have T ∩ F (G) = 1. In particular,
                                                  0            0
since F (G) contains the abelian subgroup G , we have G ∩T = 1, and since the first
                                                   0                   0
paragraph gives G = G0 T , we obtain G = G o T . Now, since G ≤ F (G) and since
                            0
T ∩ F (G) = 1, we find G = F (G) = F (G)/Z. Moreover, C = CZ/Z is a Carter
subgroup of G (Fact 6.1 (iii)), and Fact 6.1 (iν) provides a definable connected
characteristic abelian subgroup A = A/Z in G such that G = A o C. Since Fact
2.10 (iii) says that T is central in C, the definable subgroup AT is normal in G and
the first paragraph gives G = AT . Thus we obtain C = T . Since G0 is torsion-free,
                      0
Z(G) ≤ F (G) = G is torsion-free too. In particular, since Z(G) normalizes the
Carter subgroup C, we obtain Z(G) ≤ C ∩ F (G) = T ∩ F (G) = 1. This proves that
G is a centerless 2-solvable group.
                       0
     We show that G has no nontrivial proper definable subgroup. Fact 6.4 (iii)
gives G00 ≤ Φ(G) ≤ M , so M is normal in M Z, and M = M Z/Z is proper in G
by the first paragraph. Then M is the unique maximal proper definable connected
                                                     0
subgroup of G containing T . In particular G has no decomposition of the form
   0                                                                             0
G = A1 A2 for two proper definable connected subgroups A1 and A2 of G , with A1
and A2 normal in G, otherwise M would contain Ai T for i = 1, 2. Then Lemma
5.6 and Proposition 6.2 show that G is definably linear over an interpretable field
K. Thus, since K and Q are isomorphic, definably in Q (Fact 2.6), each closed
subgroup of G is definable, and the pseudo-tori of G are tori. Moreover, in the pure
                                      0
field Q, since G0 is torsion-free, G is a Q-vector space. Thus, in Q, since T is a
                    0                                       0
torus acting on G , there is a basis (v1 , · · · , vn ) of G , where n is the dimension of
   0
G over Q, such that T normalizes Q · vi for each i. Then, by the uniqueness of
                              0                                          0
M , we obtain n = 1 and G = Q · v1 . Now Fact 2.7 says that G has no nontrivial
proper definable subgroup.
     We show that G0 /G00 has no nontrivial proper definable subgroup. By Fact 6.1
(iii) and (iν), G/G00 has a definable connected characteristic subgroup B/G00 such
that G/G00 = B/G00 o CG00 /G00 . Since T is central in C (Fact 2.10 (iii)), the
subgroup BT is normal in G and the first paragraph gives G = BT , so CG00 /G00 =
T G00 /G00 . In particular B contains G0 . Since Fact 6.1 (iii) says that G = G0 C, we
obtain B = G0 . Moreover, Z/G00 = Z(G/G00 ) normalizes CG00 /G00 therefore, since
CG00 /G00 is a Carter subgroup of G/G00 (Fact 6.1 (iii)), we obtain Z ≤ CG00 (Fact 6.1
                                                                                   0
(ii)). Now Z/G00 ∩ G0 /G00 is trivial, and G0 /G00 is definably isomorphic to G . Thus
G0 /G00 has no nontrivial proper definable subgroup. Since G is a solvable connected
algebraic group, G0 is nilpotent, and we have Φ(G0 ) = G00 (Fact 6.4 (iii)). Let
x ∈ G0 \ G00 and let X := d(x) be the smallest definable subgroup of G0 containing
x. Then X is abelian and, since G0 /G00 has no nontrivial proper definable subgroup,
we have G0 = XG00 = XΦ(G0 ). Thus Fact 6.4 (i) gives G0 = X. In particular, G0
is abelian and G00 = 1. Now G0 has no nontrivial proper definable subgroup. Since
G = G0 T and since F (G) contains G0 , we have F (G) = G0 (T ∩F (G)). Consequently,
either F (G) = T ∩ F (G), or T ∩ F (G) is a maximal proper definable subgroup of
F (G). In the first case, we obtain G0 ≤ T and, since G = G0 T , we have G = T and
48                                OLIVIER FRÉCON


G is abelian, contradicting our choice of G. In the second case, T ∩ F (G) is normal
in F (G). But, since T ∩ F (G)  Z(G), we have T ∩ F (G) 6= 1 and T ∩ Z(F (G)) is
nontrivial. Hence, since we have G = G0 T = F (G)T , the subgroup T ∩ Z(F (G)) is
central in G, contradicting that G is centerless. This finishes the proof. 

                       7. Analysis of G/Z(G) and of G0
   The purpose of this section is to prove that, if G is a connected algebraic group
over Q, then G/Z(G) is definably linear and G0 is definably affine, in the ACF -
expansion of the pure group G (Theorems 7.13).
   Moreover, we obtain some results on A(G) and W (G), particularly when the
ground field is of positive caracteristic.
7.1. The subgroups S(G) and T (G). For any group G of finite Morley rank,
we denote by S(G) the connected component of the intersection of the maximal
pseudo-tori of G, and by T (G) the subgroup of G generated by its pseudo-tori.
Remark 7.1. –
   • By the Zilber’s Indecomposability Theorem, T (G) is a connected definable
     subgroup of G, for any group G of finite Morley rank.
   • If G is an ACF -group, then T (G) contains all the tori of G.
   • Moreover, S(G) is central in G◦ .
     Indeed, it is central in T (G), and the conjugacy of the maximal pseudo-tori
     of G (Fact 2.10 (i)) and a Frattini Argument provide G◦ = T (G)NG◦ (T )
     for each maximal pseudo-tori T of G. So, by Fact 2.10 (ii), we have S(G) ≤
     Z(G◦ ).
   In any group G of finite Morley rank, we denote by Q(G) the quasiunipotent
radical, which is the largest normal connected definable nilpotent subgroup of G
with no nontrivial radicable torsion subgroup. This subgroup was introduced in [2].
Ideally, in any ACF -group, this subgroup is the unipotent radical. However, this
                                                                         ∗
fails for some abelian connected groups, since the pure group Q+ × Q is abstractly
                 ∗
isomorphic to Q , so its quasiunipotent radical is trivial. In the same way, if K is an
algebraically closed field of characteristic p > 0, and if we consider the ACF -group
G = K+ ⊕ Fp as a pure group, then G is connected, so its quasiunipotent radical
is G, while its unipotent radical is K+ ⊕ {0} < G.
Lemma 7.2. – In any connected ACF -group G, we have
                       G/S(G) = Q(G/S(G)) · T (G)/S(G).
   Proof – By Fact 2.10 (iν), we may assume S(G) = 1. Let K be an algebraically
closed field such that G is interpretable in K. We may assume that G is an algebraic
group over K. In particular, T (G) is an algebraic subgroup of G containing each
torus of G.
   By Lemma 4.1, the algebraic group G is connected. We denote by GL the
largest connected linear algebraic subgroup of G. In particular, G◦◦ /GL is an
abelian variety, so it is a pseudo-torus, and it is covered by T (G) (Fact 2.10 (iν)).
Moreover, we have GL = U o S for S a maximal reductive subgroup of GL and U
its unipotent radical. Since S is generated by its tori, we obtain S ≤ T (G).
   Now let Q := d(U ) denote the smallest definable subgroup of G containing
U . Since U is a unipotent group, U is nilpotent and contained in d(U )◦ , so Q is
                   ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            49


nilpotent and connected. We show that Q = U . By Fact 2.10 (iii), Q has a unique
maximal pseudo-torus T . In particular T is normal in G and it is contained in each
maximal pseudo-torus of G, so we have T ≤ S(G) = 1. Thus Q is quasiunipotent
and it is contained in Q(G). Hence G◦◦ is contained in Q(G)T (G), and we obtain
the result by connectedness of G. 
Proposition 7.3. – Let G be an ACFp -group where p is either a prime or zero.
We assume that if p = 0, then G is the ACF -expansion of the pure group associated
to an algebraic group over Q. Then T (G)/S(G) is definably affine.
   Proof – We may assume G = T (G) and, by Fact 2.10 (iν), we may assume
S(G) = 1. Let T be a maximal pseudo-torus of G containing a maximal torus of G,
and let B be a Borel subgroup of G, in the algebraic sense, with B containing T .
Since S(B) is central in B (Remark 7.1), it is central in G too, and it is contained
in S(G) = 1 by the conjugacy of the maximal pseudo-tori (Fact 2.10 (i)). Moreover,
Fact 2.5 says that, for each minimal infinite definable T -normal section A of B, the
quotient T /CT (A) is definably affine. Thus, W (T )F (B)◦ is nilpotent, and since B 0
is nilpotent and connected, W (T )F (B)◦ is contained in F (B).
   If p = 0, then Theorem 6.3 implies that W (T ) is central in B, and Corollary
5.18 says that W (T ) is connected. Thus W (T ) is contained in S(B) = 1 by the
conjugacy of the maximal pseudo-tori in B (Fact 2.10 (i)), and T is definably affine.
Now T (G) is definably affine by Theorem 5.9.
   If p is a prime, then each abelian radicable definable subgroup of G has torsion,
so it is a decent torus. Therefore Fact 2.10 (iii) says that W (T )◦ is central in B,
and it is contained in S(B) = 1 by the conjugacy of the maximal pseudo-tori in B
(Fact 2.10 (i)). Now W (T ) is finite, and it is a p-group by Corollary 5.18. But G
is an ACFp -group, so it contains no nontrivial radicable p-subgroup. Hence T has
no nontrivial p-subgroup, and W (T ) is trivial. Consequently T is definably affine,
and T (G) is definably affine by Theorem 5.9. 
7.2. More on W (G).
Proposition 7.4. – Let A be a G-minimal subgroup of an ACF -group G. If CG (A)
has infinite index in G, then A is definably linear over one interpretable field.
   Proof – Let K be an algebraically closed field interpreting G. We consider G
as an algebraic group defined over K. By G-minimality of A, and since CG (A) has
infinite index in G, we have A = [A, G◦◦ ], and A is connected in the pure field K.
   First we assume that A is abelian. Let B be a Borel subgroup of G. In particular
B contains A. Since CG (A) has infinite index in G, then A is non-central in G◦◦ , so
the intersection A∩Z(G◦◦ ) is finite by G-minimality of A, and A∩Z(B) is finite too
[24, Corollary 22.2.B]. Since B is connected and solvable in the pure field K, then
d(B) is connected and solvable in the ACF -group G. Let A0 be a d(B)-minimal
subgroup in A. Since A ∩ Z(B) is finite, the subgroup A0 is non-central in d(B).
Now Fact 2.5 says that A0 is definably linear over one interpretable field K0 . Since
A is the normal closure of A0 , Theorem 5.9 shows that A is definably linear over
K0 .
   If A is not abelian, then Z(A) is finite. Let B be a Borel subgroup of A. Since A
is connected in the pure field K, then B is a maximal solvable subgroup of A, and
B is definable in the ACF -group G. Moreover Z(B) = Z(A) is finite [24, Corollary
22.2.B], so if A0 is a B-minimal subgroup of B, then A0 is non-central in B. Now
50                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


Fact 2.5 says that A0 is definably linear over one interpretable field K0 , and since
A is the normal closure of A0 , Theorem 5.9 shows that A is definably linear over
K0 . 
Lemma 7.5. – Let G be a group of finite Morley rank. If G is residually de-
finably linear over interpretable fields K1 , . . . , Kn , then G is definably linear over
K1 , . . . , K n .
  Proof – We proceed as in the proof of Lemma 5.17. We find finitely many
normal definable subgroups S1 , . . . , Sm of G such that ∩m i=1 Si = 1 and such that
G/Si is definably linear over K1 , . . . , Kn for each i. Then G definably embeds in
(G/S1 ) × · · · × (G/Sm ), and the result follows. 
Lemma 7.6. – Let H be a normal connected definable subgroup of an ACF -group
G. If H is definably affine over interpretable fields K1 , . . . , Kn , then the quotient
G/CG (H) is definably linear over K1 , . . . , Kn .
    Proof – We may assume that Ki is not definably isomorphic to Kj for each
i 6= j. For each i, we denote by Hi the largest connected definable subgroup of
H definably affine over Ki (Theorem 5.9). These subgroups are normal in G. By
Proposition 5.11, H is generated by H1 , . . . , Hn . Hence, by Lemma 7.5, we may
assume that H is definably affine over one interpretable field K. Moreover, we may
assume that K is infinite.
    Let L be an algebraically closed field such that G is interpretable in the pure
field L. By Fact 2.6, the fields K and L are isomorphic, definably in L. We
consider H oG/CG (H), where G/CG (H) acts on H by conjugation. It is isomorphic
to an algebraic group over L, definably in L. Since K and L are isomorphic,
definably in L, we find an isomorphism ϕ, definable in L, from H o G/CG (H)
to an algebraic group R over K. Since H is definably affine over K and since
K and L are isomorphic, definably in L, the map ϕ|H : H → ϕ(H) is definable
in G. Moreover, since K and L are isomorphic, definably in L, the subgroup
V = ϕ(G/CG (H)) is algebraic over K, and it is definable in G. Now the semidirect
product R = ϕ(H) o V is definable in G. Thus, since ϕ|H is definable in G,
the graph ∆ = {(g, v) ∈ G/CG (H) × V | ∀h ∈ H, ϕ|H (g · h) = v · ϕ|H (h)} of
ϕ|G/CG (H) : G/CG (H) → V is definable in G too. From now on, G/CG (H) is
definably isomorphic to an algebraic group V over K.
    We verify that V is affine. Since the ACF -group H is connected, and since
ϕ(H) and ϕ|H are definable in G, then ϕ(H) is connected in G too, and ϕ(H) is
connected in the pure field K. Thus V is an algebraic group acting faithfully over
a connected algebraic group, so it is affine by the Rosenlicht’s Theorem [31, §5,
Théorème 13]. This implies that G/CG (H) is definably linear over K. 
Fact 7.7. – [19, Proposition 4.3] Let G be a group of finite Morley rank. If G◦ is
definably linear over interpretable fields K1 , . . . , Kn , then G is definably linear over
K1 , . . . , Kn too.
Remark 7.8. – If G is a connected algebraic group over an algebraically closed
field K, then the elements of F (G)/F (G)◦◦ are semisimple.
    Indeed, if we denote by U the unipotent radical of G, then G/U is a reductive
group, and since F (G)◦◦ contains U [24, §19.5], the quotient G/F (G)◦◦ is reductive
too. But G is connected, so F (G)/F (G)◦◦ is centralized by G, and all the elements
of F (G)/F (G)◦◦ are semisimple.
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            51


Lemma 7.9. – In any connected ACF -group G, the subgroup F (G)◦ covers G/G◦◦ .
   Proof – By Lemma 4.1, G has a normal definable connected subgroup I con-
tained in G◦◦ such that G/I is an abelian p-group. In particular, if U denotes
the unipotent radical of G◦◦ , then U covers G◦◦ /I. But U is a normal nilpotent
connected closed subgroup of G◦◦ . Hence d(U ) is a normal nilpotent connected
definable subgroup of G, and it is contained in F (G)◦ . Thus G◦◦ is contained in
the definable subgroup F (G)◦ I, and since G is connected, we obtain G = F (G)◦ I.
Since G◦◦ contains I, we obtain the result. 
Corollary 7.10. – For each ACF -group G, the quotient G/F (G) is definably linear,
and G/F (G)◦ is definably affine. In particular W (G) is nilpotent.
    Proof – Let S denote the centralizer in G◦ of all the G◦ -minimal sections of G◦ .
Let U/V be a G◦ -minimal section of G◦ . If G◦ does not centralize U/V , then U/V is
definably linear over one interpretable field by Proposition 7.4, and G◦ /CG◦ (U/V )
is definably linear by Lemma 7.6. Consequently G◦ /S is definably linear (Lemma
7.5). Since G◦ is connected, it centralizes S/S ◦ . But S centralizes all its G◦ -
minimal sections, hence S is nilpotent, that is F (G◦ ) contains S. Conversely, since
F (G◦ ) is nilpotent and normal, it centralizes all the G◦ -minimal sections of G◦ , so
S = F (G◦ ). Thus G◦ /F (G◦ ) is definably linear, and since F (G◦ ) = F (G) ∩ G◦ , the
quotient G◦ F (G)/F (G) is definably linear. We conclude that G/F (G) is definably
linear by using Fact 7.7.
    Let K be an algebraically closed field interpreting G, and let p be its character-
istic (p is a prime or zero). If p = 0, then G/F (G)◦ is definably affine by Corollary
5.18, so we may assume that p is a prime. Viewing G as an algebraic group over
K, Remark 7.8 shows that F (G◦◦ )/F (G◦◦ )◦◦ has no nontrivial unipotent element,
so p does not divide its order. Since Lemma 7.9 says that F (G◦ )◦ covers G◦ /G◦◦ ,
then F (G◦ )/F (G◦ )◦ is isomorphic to (F (G◦ ) ∩ G◦◦ )/(F (G◦ )◦ ∩ G◦◦ ). But we have
F (G◦◦ ) = F (G◦ ) ∩ G◦◦ , and F (G◦ )◦ ∩ G◦◦ contains F (G◦◦ )◦◦ , so p does not di-
vides the order of F (G◦ )/F (G◦ )◦ . Hence Theorem 5.16 shows that G◦ //F (G◦ )◦ is
definably affine, and since F (G)◦ = F (G◦ )◦ , the quotient G/F (G◦ )◦ is definably
affine too by Corollary5.14. 
Corollary 7.11. – Let G be an ACFp -group where p is either a prime or zero. We
assume that if p = 0, then G is the ACF -expansion of the pure group associated to
an algebraic group over Q. Then G/CG (T (G)) is definably affine.
   Proof – By Corollary 5.14, we may assume that G is connected. In particular,
S(G) is central in G. We consider C = CG (T (G)/S(G)). By Proposition 7.3 and
Lemma 7.6, the quotient G/C is definably linear.
   Since [T (G), C] is contained in S(G), each maximal pseudo-torus of G is nor-
malized by C and, by Fact 2.10 (ii), it is centralized by C ◦ . This implies that C ◦
centralizes T (G), so C/CG (T (G)) is a finite group. Then, by Theorem 5.16, we
may assume that p is a prime and that p divides the order of C/CG (T (G)).
   Let c be a p-element of C/CG (T (G)), and let T be a maximal pseudo-torus of
G. We consider the semi-direct product R = T o hci, where hci acts on T by
conjugation. It is a nilpotent group of class at most two. Thus [t, c] is a p-element
for each t ∈ T and, by the Zil’ber Indecomposable Theorem, [T, hci] is a connected
p-subgroup of T , so it is trivial and R is abelian. This implies that c centralizes
T (G), and contradicts that p divides the order of C/CG (T (G)). 
52                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


7.3. More when the ground field is Q.
Lemma 7.12. – Let H be a normal definable subgroup of a connected ACF -group G.
If G/CG (H) is definably affine over the fields K1 , . . . , Kn , then [G, H] is definably
affine over K1 , . . . , Kn too.
    Proof – We consider the semi-direct product R = H o G/CG (H), where
G/CG (H) acts on H by conjugation. Then R is an ACF -group, and the subgroup
S of R generated by the conjugates of G/CG (H) is definably affine over K1 , . . . , Kn
(Theorem 5.9). But S contains the definable subgroup [G, H], so [G, H] is definably
affine over K1 , . . . , Kn . 
  Then we obtain a result on the abstract structure of the algebraic groups over
Q, and this one is fundamental for us.
Theorem 7.13. – Let G be a connected algebraic group over Q. Then, in the
ACF -expansion of the pure group G, the quotient G/Z(G) is definably linear, and
G0 is definably affine.
   Furthermore, if U/Z(G) (resp. V /Z(G)) is the largest connected subgroup of
G/Z(G), definably linear over one interpretable field K (resp. L), and if K and L
are not definably isomorphic, then [U, V ] is trivial and U 0 ∩ V 0 is finite.
   Proof – We show that G/Z(G) is definably affine. Let Q be the preimage of
Q(G/S(G)) in G. Since S(G) is central in G, the group Q is nilpotent, and Q/Z(Q)
is definably linear by Theorem 4.3. Moreover, by Corollary 7.11, the quotient
Q/CQ (T (G)) is definably affine, so QZ(G)/Z(G) is definably affine by Lemma 7.2.
Since Proposition 7.3 says that T (G)/S(G) is definably affine, T (G)Z(G)/Z(G) is
definably affine too. Hence G/Z(G) is definably affine by Theorem 5.9 and Lemma
7.2. Furthermore, Lemma 7.12 says that G0 is definably affine.
   We show that G/Z(G) is definably linear. By Corollary 5.8, G/Z(G) has a finite
normal subgroup E/Z(G) such that G/E is definably linear. In particular, G cen-
tralizes E/Z(G), and E is nilpotent. We consider a bounded exponent subgroup B0
of E covering E/Z(G). Then B0 is contained in a characteristic bounded exponent
subgroup B1 of E, and B1 is finite since Q is of characteristic zero. Hence B1 is
central in G, and E/Z(G) is trivial. This proves that G/Z(G) is definably linear.
   By Lemma 7.12, the groups [G, U ] and [G, V ] are definably affine over K and L
respectively, so they are definably linear over K and L respectively. By Proposition
5.11, this implies that U 0 ∩ V 0 ≤ [G, U ] ∩ [G, V ] and [U, V ] ≤ [G, U ] ∩ [G, V ] are
finite. Moreover, we have [U, V ] = [U ◦ Z(G), V ] = [U ◦ , V ], so [U, V ] is connected,
and [U, V ] is trivial, as desired. 

7.4. The subgroups A(G) and W (G) in positive characteristic.
Proposition 7.14. – Let G be a connected ACFp -group for a prime p. If Z(G) is
finite and if p does not divide its order, then G is definably affine.
   Proof – Since S(G) is connected and central in G, we have S(G) = 1, and
T (G) is definably affine (Proposition 7.3). Then, by Lemma 7.2 and Theorem 5.9,
we have just to prove that W (Q(G)) is trivial.
   If W (Q(G)) is finite, then it is central in G, so p does not divides its order. But
Corollary 5.18 says that |W (Q(G))| is a power of p, hence we obtain W (Q(G)) = 1,
as desired.
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                             53


   From now on, we assume toward a contradiction that W (Q(G)) is infinite. Let
A be a G-minimal subgroup of W (Q(G)). Since Q(G) is nilpotent, A is central
in Q(G). But W (Q(G)) centralizes T (G) (Corollary 7.11), so A is central in G =
Q(G)T (G) (Lemma 7.2), contradicting that Z(G) is finite. 

   We deduce from this a result concerning the structure of ACFp -groups when p
is a prime.
Corollary 7.15. – If G is a connected ACFp -group for a prime p, then W (G) is
contained in the hypercenter of G.
  Moreover, our study provides a piece of information concerning A(G).
Proposition 7.16. – If G is a connected ACFp -group for a prime p, then G/A(G)
is nilpotent.
   Proof – Let H be the smallest normal definable subgroup of G such that G/H
is nilpotent. Since G is connected, H is connected too. The group G/T (G) has no
nontrivial pseudo-torus (Fact 2.10 (iν)), so it has no nontrivial radicable torsion
subgroup. Since it is constructible over an algebraically closed field, it is nilpotent-
by-finite, and by connectedness of the ACF -group G, it is nilpotent. This implies
H ≤ T (G) and H ≤ [G, T (G)]. Hence Corollary 7.11 and Lemma 7.12 yield the
result. 

                        8. Canonical development of G
   In this section, we prove Theorem 1.1 in the special case K = Q (Lemma 8.10
and Theorem 8.14).
   For the rest of this section, we fix a nontrivial connected algebraic group G over
Q, and we consider the ACF -expansion of the pure group G. By Theorem 7.13,
we find interpretable fields K1 , . . . , Kn such that Ki is not definably isomorphic to
Kj for each i 6= j, and such that G/Z(G) is definably linear over K1 , . . . , Kn . By
Lemma 5.6 and Proposition 5.11, if for each i we denote by Gi /Z(G) the largest
connected subgroup of G/Z(G) definably linear over Ki , the quotient G/Z(G) is
the direct product of the subgroups Gi /Z(G), and G0i = (G◦i )0 is definably linear
over Ki for each i (Lemma 7.12). Moreover, Theorem 7.13 says that G is the central
product of G1 , . . . , Gn , and we may assume that Gi /Z(G) is nontrivial for each i.
   First we consider a purely algebraic lemma.
Lemma 8.1. – Let G̃ be a connected affine algebraic group over an algebraically
closed field K of characteristic zero. Then, for each positive integer n, up to iso-
morphism of algebraic groups, there is a unique connected affine algebraic extension
G∗ of G̃, with a normal finite subgroup X of exponent dividing n, and satisfying
the following property:
   for each connected affine algebraic group H over K, if H has a normal finite sub-
group E of exponent dividing n such that G̃ and H/E are algebraically isomorphic,
there is an algebraic surjective homomorphism γ : G∗ → H such that γ(X) = E.
   Proof – In this proof, any couple (H, E), where H is a connected affine algebraic
group over K and E a normal finite subgroup of H of exponent dividing n, is said
to be an n-extension of G̃ if G̃ and H/E are isomorphic as algebraic groups. We
consider the family E of the n-extensions of G̃ modulo the equivalence relation R
defined by the following assertion: “if (H1 , E1 ) and (H2 , E2 )) are two n-extensions
54                                    OLIVIER FRÉCON


of G̃, we denote by (H1 , E1 )R(H2 , E2 ) the existence of an algebraic isomorphism
γ : H1 → H2 such that γ(E1 ) = E2 .” We identify any n-extension of G̃ with its
class modulo R. Moreover, we consider the order relation ≤ on E defined by the
following assertion: “if (H1 , E1 ) and (H2 , E2 )) are two elements of E , we denote
by (H1 , E1 ) ≤ (H2 , E2 ) the existence of an algebraic surjective homomorphism γ :
H2 → H1 such that γ(E2 ) = E1 .”
   First we notice that, for each element (H, E) of E , the order of E is at most nr ,
where r denotes the Lie rank of the algebraic group G̃. Indeed, since E is finite
and since G̃ and H/E are isomorphic as algebraic groups, the rank of H is r too.
But the field K has characteristic zero, and E is finite and normal in H, so E
is contained in any maximal torus of H. Consequently, since the exponent of E
divides n, the order of E is at most nr .
   Now we have just to prove that, if (M, E) and (N, F ) are two maximal elements
of E , then (M, E)R(N, F ). Since M/E and N/F are isomorphic to G̃ as algebraic
groups, we may consider a subgroup ∆ of M × N such that ∆/(E × F ) is the graph
of an isomorphism of algebraic groups from M/E to N/F . We consider D = ∆◦ and
A = D ∩ (E × F ). Then D, M and N have the same dimensions over K, and D ∩ M
and D ∩ N are contained in A. We consider the projection maps ρM : M × N → M
and ρN : M × N → N . Since D, M and N have the same dimensions, and since
D ∩ M and D ∩ N are contained in A, the images of D by ρM and ρN are M and
N respectively. Moreover, we have
      D ∩ ρ−1
           M (E) = D ∩ (E × N ) = D ∩ (∆ ∩ (E × N )) = D ∩ (E × F ) = A
                             −1
and, in the same way, D ∩ ρN    (F ) = A. In particular, (D, A) is an n-extension
of G̃ satisfying (M, E) ≤ (D, A) and (N, F ) ≤ (D, A). By the maximalities of
(M, E) and (N, F ), we obtain (M, E)R(D, A) and (N, F )R(D, A). Finally, we find
(M, E)R(N, F ), and we can take (G∗ , X) = (M, E). 
   For each i, we consider an algebraic complement Ci /G0i of Z(G)◦ G0i /G0i in G◦i /G0i .
Since G is connected, the torsion part of Z(G) ∩ G0 is finite. Then, for each i, we
                                                                                            ∗
denote by ni the exponent of the torsion subgroup Xi of Z(G)◦ ∩G0i , and by Ci the
unique connected affine algebraic extension of Ci := Ci /Xi , with a normal finite
subgroup of exponent dividing ni and satisfying the property of Lemma 8.1.
   Moreover, we fix an algebraic complement Z to (Z(G)◦ ∩ G0 )◦ in Z(G)◦ . We
note that, since G is the central product of G1 , . . . , Gn , the group G0 is the central
product of G01 , . . . , G0n , and G is also the central product of Z and C1 , . . . , Cn . Now
we obtain the following structural result on G.
Lemma 8.2. – The group G has a central finite subgroup F0 such that G/F0 is the
direct product of ZF0 /F0 and of ×nk=1 Ck F0 /F0 .
  Proof – Since G0j is definably linear over Kj for each j, Lemma 5.6 and
                                                             Qn
Corollary 5.8 imply that the Morley rank of Z(G) ∩ G0 = j=1 (Z(G) ∩ G0j ) is
Pn                  0
  k=1 rk(Z(G) ∩ Gk ). Then we obtain
        Pn                   Pn                      ◦            ◦     0
          k=1 rk(Ck ) = Pk=1 (rk(Gk ) − rk(Z(G) ) + rk(Z(G) ∩ Gk ))
                               n                              0
                        =      k=1 (rk(Gk /Z(G)) + rk(Z(G) ∩ Gk ))
                        = rk(G/Z(G)) + rk(Z(G) ∩ G0 ),
              Pn
and
 Qn rk(Z) + k=1 rk(Ci ) = rk(G/Z(G)) + rk(Z(G)) = rk(G).   Q      Thus, Z0 = Z ∩
( k=1 Ck ) is finite, and for each j, the group Ej = Cj ∩ ( k6=j Ck ) is finite too.
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                              55


Let F0 be the subgroup generated by Z0 and the subgroups Ej . Then F0 is finite
and central in G, and G/F0 is the direct product of ZF0 /F0 and of ×nk=1 Ck F0 /F0 .

   It is not clear that Ci is uniquely determined in the pure group G. However, we
                 ∗
will see that Ci is uniquely determined in the pure group G, up to isomorphism
of algebraic groups (Corollary 8.9). The proof need the following notion.
Definition 8.3. – A group A is said to be centrally indecomposable if there is no
decomposition of A under the form of a central product of two proper subgroups
having a finite intersection.
Lemma 8.4. – Let G be a connected affine algebraic group over an algebraically
closed field K. If G is a central product of two proper closed subgroups U and V with
U ∩ V finite, then G has a noncontinuous (for the Zariski topology) automorphism
α centralizing U .
   In particular, α is nonstandard.
   Furthermore, we may choose α such that, for any two infinite closed subgroups
U1 and V1 of U and V respectively, the isomorphism β : U1 V1 → α(U1 V1 ) induced
by α is noncontinuous.
   Proof – First we notice that U and V are infinite since G = U V is connected,
and since U and V are closed and proper in G. Let µ be a nonconstructible field
automorphism of K. Since U ∩ V is finite, we may choose µ centralizing U ∩ V . We
consider the automorphism α of G defined by α(uv) = µ(u)v for each u ∈ U and
each v ∈ V . Then α centralizes U .
   Let U1 and V1 be two infinite closed subgroups of U and V respectively. We
assume toward a contradiction that the isomorphism β : U1 V1 → α(U1 V1 ) induced
by α is continuous. We may suppose that U1 and V1 are connected and of dimension
one. Thus U1 (resp. V1 ) is definably isomorphic either to K+ , or to K ∗ . Therefore,
we may assume that, either U1 and V1 are definably isomorphic, or U1 (resp. V1 )
is definably isomorphic to K ∗ (resp. K+ ). Let δ be an injective constructible map
from U1 to V1 such that δ(u) = u for each u ∈ U1 ∩ V1 . Then X = {uδ(u) | u ∈ U1 }
is a constructible set, and since α is continuous, α(X) = {µ(u)δ(u) | u ∈ U1 } is
constructible too. We notice that If y ∈ α(U1 ) ∩ α(V1 ),
   Then we have β = γ ◦ ν for ν a field automorphism of K, and γ an isogeny.
We obtain ν(v) = γ −1 (v) for each v ∈ V1 . Since V1 is infinite, this implies that
ν is definable in the pure field K. Consequently, β is definable in the pure field
K too. Now, since U1 is infinite and since we have β(u) = µ(u) for each u ∈ U1 ,
the automorphism µ is definable in the pure field K too. In particular, CK (µ) is
a definable subfield of K, so either µ is trivial, or CK (µ) is finite. But the field K
has characteristic zero, so µ centralizes an infinite subfield of K. Hence µ is trivial
contradicting our choice of µ. 
Lemma 8.5. – For each i, we have Ci0 = G0i and Z(Ci )◦ ≤ Z(G)◦ ∩ Ci ≤ Ci0 .
   Proof – Since Gi = G◦i Z(G) = Ci Z(G), we have Ci0 = G0i . In particular,
since G◦i /G0i is the direct product of Ci /G0i and of Z(G)◦ G0i /G0i , we obtain Z(G)◦ ∩
Ci ≤ Ci0 . Moreover, since G is the central product of G1 , . . . , Gn , we have also
Z(Ci )◦ ≤ Z(G)◦ ∩ Ci . 
Proposition 8.6. – For each i, the groups Ci and Ci are centrally indecomposable.
56                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON


   Proof – We assume toward a contradiction that Ci is not centrally indecom-
posable. Let U and V be two proper subgroups of Ci having a finite intersection
and such that Ci is the central product of U and V . Since Ci is connected, U and
V are infinite. If U is abelian, then U centralizes Gi , and since Gi centralizes Gj for
each j 6= i by Theorem 7.13, we obtain U ≤ Z(G). Then Z(G)◦ ∩ U is an infinite
subgroup of Z(G)◦ ∩ Ci ≤ Ci0 = V 0 , contradicting that U ∩ V is finite. Hence U is
not abelian. In the same way, V is not abelian. In particular, CCi (U ) = Z(U )V and
CCi (V ) = U Z(V ) are proper in Ci . Moreover, by the connectedness of Ci , we find
Ci = CU CV , for CU := CCi (V )◦ and CV := CCi (U )◦ , and this product is central.
Thus, Ci is the central product of two proper connected algebraic subgroups CU
and CV .
   We consider an algebraic complement R/CU0 of (CU ∩ CV )◦ CU0 /CU0 in CU /CU0 ,
and an algebraic complement S/CV0 of (R ∩ CV )◦ CV0 /CV0 in CV /CV0 . Then Ci is
the central product of R and S, and (R ∩ S)◦ is contained in CU0 ∩ CV0 ≤ U 0 ∩ V 0 ,
therefore R ∩ S is finite. Since R ≤ CU and S ≤ CV are proper in Ci , they are
infinite. In the same way that for U and V , the subgroups R and S are not abelian,
and since they are connected, R0 and S 0 are infinite.
   By Lemma 8.4, the group Ci has a nonstandard automorphism α centralizing
R(Ci ∩ F0 ). Moreover, we may choose α such that the automorphism β of G0i =
Ci0 = R0 S 0 induced by α is nonstandard.
                                        Q        Since G is the central product of Z
and C1 , . . . , Cn , and since Ci ∩ (Z k6=i Ck ) is contained in Ci ∩ F0 , there is an
                                          Q
automorphism µ of G centralizing Z k6=i Ck and whose restriction to Ci is α. In
particular, the restriction of µ to Ci0 is nonstandard. But Ci0 = G0i is definably linear
over Ki , hence this contradicts Fact 3.6, and Ci is centrally indecomposable.
   Finally, if Ci is the central product of two proper subgroups U1 /Xi and V1 /Xi
having a finite intersection, then U1 and V1 are two proper subgroups of Ci having
a finite intersection, satisfying Ci = U1 V1 , and such that [U1 , V1 ] ≤ Xi is finite
and central in Ci . Let V2 be a subgroup of V1 such that Ci = U1 V2 , and such
that |U1 ∩ V2 | is minimal among such subgroups. Then, for each u ∈ U1 , the map
adu : V2 → Xi , defined for each v ∈ V2 by adu (v) = [u, v], is an homomorphism.
Moreover, its kernel V3 has finite index in V2 . But Q has characteristic zero and
Ci is connected, so Ci has no proper subgroup of finite index. Hence we have
Ci = U1 V3 , and V3 = V2 by the choice of V2 . Thus Ci is the central product of
U1 and V2 , contradicting the previous paragraphs. Consequently, Ci is centrally
indecomposable. 

Proposition 8.7. – If A is any affine algebraic group over Q abstractly isomorphic
to Ci , then A is isomorphic to Ci as algebraic groups.

   Proof – We have to find an isomorphism between A and Ci , definable in the
pure field Q. Let α be an abstract isomorphism between A and Ci . For each
isomorphism α0 : A → Ci , we denote by α0 the isomorphism between A/Z(A)◦
and Ci /Z(Ci )◦ , induced by α0 . By Proposition 8.6, the group Ci is centrally in-
decomposable, and since it is connected, then Theorem 7.13 implies that, in the
ACF -expansion of the pure group Ci , the quotient Ci /Z(Ci ) is definably linear
over one interpretable field. Then Ci /Z(Ci )◦ is definably linear over one inter-
pretable field too, by Proposition 5.15. Now Fact 3.6 says that the isomorphism
α : A/Z(A)◦ → Ci /Z(Ci )◦ is standard. Thus, there is an automorphism δ of Ci ,
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                             57

                                                           −1
induced by a field automorphism of Q, such that α ◦ δ = α ◦ δ −1 is an isomor-
phism of algebraic groups. Let µ = α ◦ δ −1 , and let ∆ be its graph. Then, if
Z1 = Z(A)◦ × Z(Ci )◦ , the group ∆Z1 = ∆Z(A)◦ = ∆Z(Ci )◦ is definable in the
pure field Q. This implies that (∆Z1 )0 = ∆0 is definable in the pure field Q too.
   We consider an algebraic complement D/∆0 of Z1 ∆0 /∆0 in ∆Z1 /∆0 . Then, since
∆Z1 /Z1 is the graph of µ, we have D ∩ A ≤ ∆Z1 ∩ A = Z1 . So we obtain
                     D ∩ A ≤ (D ∩ Z1 ) ∩ A ≤ ∆0 ∩ A ≤ ∆ ∩ A.
Thus, since ∆ is the graph of an isomorphism from A to Ci , we find D ∩ A = 1. In
the same way, D ∩ Ci is trivial. If ZC /Xi denotes the center of Ci , then [Ci , ZC ] is
contained in Xi , and it is connected since Ci is connected, so ZC = Z(Ci ). Hence
                           0
Z(Ci )◦ is contained in Ci by Lemma 8.5. This proves that ∆0 contains the graph
of the restriction of µ to Z(A)◦ , and it implies that ∆0 Z1 = ∆0 Z(A)◦ = ∆0 Z(Ci )◦ ,
so AD ≥ A∆0 contains Z1 . Now AD contains ∆ ≤ ∆Z1 = DZ1 , and it contains Ci
too since ∆ is the graph of µ. Consequently, we have AD = ACi and, in the same
way, Ci D = ACi . Since D is an algebraic subgroup satisfying D ∩ A = D ∩ Ci = 1
and AD = Ci D = ACi , it is the graph of an isomorphism of algebraic groups from
A to Ci , and the proof is finished. 
Corollary 8.8. – Let A be a centrally indecomposable subgroup of Gi containing
G0i . If it is a complement of Z(G)◦ G0i /G0i in G◦i /G0i then, up to isomorphism of
algebraic groups, Ci is the only affine algebraic group over Q such that the abstract
groups A := A/Xi and Ci are isomorphic.
    Proof – The group (Z(G)◦ ∩ G0i )/Xi is definable in the pure group G, and it
is torsion-free, so it is divisible and it has a complement S/Xi in Z(G)◦ /Xi . Then
we have Gi = AS = Ci S, and A/(A ∩ S) is isomorphic to Ci /(Ci ∩ S) as algebraic
groups. Moreover, the group A ∩ S is contained in A ∩ Z(G)◦ ≤ Z(G)◦ ∩ G0i = Xi ,
so A ∩ S = Xi . In the same way, we have Ci ∩ S = Xi , so A and Ci are isomorphic
as abstract groups, and the conclusion follows from Proposition 8.7. 
                                                     ∗
Corollary 8.9. – The algebraic groups Ci and Ci depend just on the ACF -group
Gi .
  Proof – Since G is the central product of G1 , . . . , Gn , then we have Z(Gi ) =
Z(G), and the result follows from Corollary 8.8. 
                                                                            ∗         ∗
   From now on, we consider the direct product D(G) of the groups C1 , . . . , Cn ,
and of an abelian group T (G) which is Q+ if Z(G)◦ G0 /G0 is nontrivial and torsion-
                        ∗
free, otherwise it is (Q )r where r is the Lie rank of Z(G)◦ G0 /G0 . We note that
D(G) depends just on the pure group G by Corollary 8.9.
   By the choice of T (G), there is an integer s such that Z(G)◦ G0 /G0 is isomor-
                    s                                    s
phic to T (G) × Q+ as algebraic groups, so T (G) × Q+ is isomorphic to Z ≃
Z(G)◦ /(Z(G)◦ ∩ G0 )◦ too. Consequently, since for each i there is a surjective
                                  ∗
algebraic homomorphism from Ci to Ci with finite kernel, there is a natural sur-
                                                    s
jective algebraic homomorphism γG from D(G) × Q+ to G, with finite kernel F by
                                                s             s
Lemma 8.2. Moreover, F is central in D(G)×Q+ and, since Q+ is torsion-free, F is
contained in D(G). Since T (G) and T (G)/(T (G) ∩ F ) are isomorphic as algebraic
groups, we may choose F such that T (G) ∩ F is trivial.
                                                                  s
   Summarize: G is algebraically isomorphic to D(G)/F × Q+ , with F a central
finite subgroup such that T (G) ∩ F = 1.
58                                OLIVIER FRÉCON

                                     s−1                   −1
   We note that we have [D(G) × Q+ , γG  (Z(G))] ≤ F , so γG  (Z(G)) = Z(D(G) ×
 s                  s
Q+ ) since D(G) × Q+ is connected. Therefore we find, for each i,
                            −1           ∗              s
                           γG  (Gi ) = Ci Z(D(G) × Q+ ).
Lemma 8.10. – There is an abstract isomorphism from G to D(G)/F .
   Furthermore, if G0 does not contain Z(G)◦ , then there is an abstract isomorphism
                             t
µ : D(G)/F → D(G)/F × Q+ for each integer t.
   Proof – We may assume Z(G)◦  G0 , and t ≥ 1. Let R be the torsion part of
T (G). Then T (G) = R × S, for a direct product S of countably many copies of Q+ .
                      t
In particular, since Q+ is a direct product of countably many copies of Q+ too, the
                             t
groups T (G) and T (G) × Q+ are abstractly isomorphic. More precisely, there is an
                                               t
abstract isomorphism α : T (G) → T (G) × Q+ such that α(r) = r for each r ∈ R.
                                                              t
This gives an abstract isomorphism α∗ : D(G) → D(G) × Q+ such that α∗ (x) = x
                      ∗                                                       ∗
for each x ∈ (×ni=1 Ci ) × R. But F is finite, so it is contained in (×ni=1 Ci ) × R,
                                                                      t
and we obtain the desired isomorphism µ : D(G)/F → D(G)/F × Q+ . 
  However, by the following remark, F depends on the algebraic structure of G,
and not just of the abstract structure of G. This is a serious problem for us.
Remark 8.11. – Let r ≥ 5 be a prime integer, and let G = H1 × H2 where H1
                                               ∗                     ∗
and H2 are two copies of the group H = Q+ o Q , where the action of Q on Q+
is defined by:
                                       ∗
                    for each (a, x) ∈ Q × Q+ , a · x = ar x.
Let ∆ be the graph in G of the identity automorphism of H, and let Z be the center
                                                                              ∗
of ∆. Now let δ be a field automorphism of Q such that there exists t ∈ Q of order
r and satisfying δ(t) 6= t and δ(t) 6= t−1 . This is possible since r ≥ 5. Let µ be the
automorphism of G defined for each (h1 , h2 ) ∈ H1 × H2 by µ(h1 , h2 ) = (δ(h1 ), h2 ).
Then µ induces an abstract isomorphism from G/Z to G/µ(Z). However, the
algebraic groups G/Z and G/µ(Z) are not isomorphic.
   Indeed, suppose toward a contradiction that there is an isomorphism f : G/Z →
G/µ(Z) of algebraic groups. Then, for i = 1, 2, we have either f (Hi Z/Z) =
H1 µ(Z)/µ(Z), or f (Hi Z/Z) = H2 µ(Z)/µ(Z). Let T be a maximal torus of ∆,
and let T0 be a maximal torus of G containing T . Then T contains Z, and T /Z
(resp. T0 /Z) is a maximal torus of ∆/Z (resp. G/Z). Moreover, T0 µ(Z)/µ(Z) is
a maximal torus of G/µ(Z), and by the conjugacy of the maximal tori in G/µ(Z),
we may assume f (T0 /Z) = T0 µ(Z)/µ(Z).
   Now let S/µ(Z) = f (T /Z). Then S is of dimension one over Q, and since
S/µ(Z) is a torus, S ◦ is a torus. We have T ∩ Hi ≤ ∆ ∩ Hi = 1 for i = 1, 2, so
T /Z ∩ Hi Z/Z = 1 for i = 1, 2, and S/µ(Z) ∩ Hi µ(Z)/µ(Z) = 1 for i = 1, 2. For
i = 1, 2, we have Z ∩ Hi ≤ ∆ ∩ Hi = 1 so, since µ is an abstract automorphism of
G such that µ(Hi ) = Hi , we have µ(Z) ∩ Hi = 1. Consequently S ∩ Hi ≤ µ(Z) ∩ Hi
is trivial for i = 1, 2.
   Since T0 is a maximal torus of G, it has the form T0 = T1 × T2 , where Ti is a
maximal torus of Hi for i = 1, 2. Since S is a torus contained in T0 µ(Z) and since
µ(Z) is finite, we have S ◦ ≤ T0 . Now, since T1 , T2 , T and S ◦ are of dimension one
over Q, the groups T and S ◦ are the graphs of two isomorphisms α and β of algebraic
groups from T1 to T2 . Moreover, since dim(Ti ) = 1 for i = 1, 2, there are precisely
                   ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            59


two isomorphisms of algebraic groups from T1 to T2 , so we have either α = β or
β(x) = α(x)−1 for each x ∈ T1 . In the first case, we have T = S ◦ , so S contains
                                  ∗
Zµ(Z). But the existence of t ∈ Q of order r such that δ(t) 6= t implies Z 6= µ(Z),
                       2
so Zµ(Z) has order r since r is a prime, and we have Zµ(Z) = Z(H1 ) × Z(H2 ).
This contradicts S ∩ Hi = 1 for i = 1, 2. Hence we have β(x) = α(x)−1 for each
x ∈ T1 .
   Let Z−1 be the graph in G of the automorphism inversion of Z(H). Since we
have β(x) = α(x)−1 for each x ∈ T1 , we have Z−1 ≤ S ◦ . Moreover, the existence
          ∗
of t ∈ Q of order r such that δ(t) 6= t−1 implies Z−1 6= µ(Z), so Z−1 µ(Z) has
order r2 since r is a prime, and we have Z−1 µ(Z) = Z(H1 ) × Z(H2 ). But we have
S ∩ Hi = 1 for i = 1, 2, so the latter implies that S does not contain Z−1 . Thus,
there is no isomorphism of algebraic groups from G/Z to G/µ(Z).

Lemma 8.12. – Let X and Y be two finite subgroups of an algebraic torus T
over Q. If there is an isomorphism δ : X → Y , then there is a quasi-standard
automorphism ϕ of T such that ϕ(x) = δ(x) for each x ∈ X.

   Proof – Let X = X1 × · · · × Xr be a decomposition of X where, for each
i, Xi is cyclic and, if i > 1, its order divides the one of Xi−1 . For each i, we
consider Yi = δ(Xi ). We show, by induction on r, that there exists a direct product
T1 × · · · × Tr of subtori of T with dimension one, such that Ti contains Xi for each
i. We may assume that T contains a direct product S = T1 × · · · × Tr−1 of subtori
with dimension one, such that Ti contains Xi for each i ≤ r − 1. For each prime
p dividing |Xr |, there are pr−1 − 1 elements of order p in S, and since |Xi | divides
|Xi−1 | for each i > 1, there are pr−1 − 1 elements of order p in X1 × · · · × Xr−1
too. Consequently, S ∩ Xr is trivial.
   We note that Xr is contained in a subtorus R of T with dimension one. Indeed,
otherwise, if we consider a subtorus R1 of T containg X and with minimal dimen-
sion, then R1 has a subtorus R2 such that R1 /R2 has dimension two. Let T1 and T2
be two subtori of R1 /R2 such that R1 /R2 = T1 × T2 . Let x be the image in R1 /R2
of a generator x of Xr . By the minimality of dim(R1 ), we have x 6∈ Ti \ {1} for
i = 1, 2, so we have x = (t1 , t2 ) with ti ∈ Ti for i = 1, 2. Let µ be an isomorphism
of algebraic groups from T1 to T2 . Then we find t ∈ T1 and (a, b) ∈ N2 such that
       a
t1 = t and t2 = µ(t)b . Now we consider R = {(ua , µ(u)b ) | u ∈ T1 }. Then R is the
image of a nonzero algebraic homomorphism from T1 to R1 /R2 , so R is a subtorus
with dimension one. But R contains x, hence its preimage R0 is a subtorus of R1
containing Xr . Since we have dim(R0 ) = dim(R1 ) − 1, we have a contradiction
with the choice of R1 , and Xr is contained in a subtorus R of T with dimension
one.
   Now SR is a subtorus of T , and we find a subtorus V of SR such that SR = S×V .
we have x = (s, v) for s ∈ S and v ∈ V \ {1}. Let c1 and d1 be the orders of s
and v respectively. Then c1 and d1 divides |Xr |, and we consider c := |Xr |/c1 .
The previous paragraph applied with hsi yields a subtorus S1 of S with dimension
one and containing s. Let γ : S1 → V be an isomorphism of algebraic groups, and
let y ∈ S1 of order |Xr | such that y c = s. Then there exists an integer e dividing
|Xr | such that γ(y)e = v. Since |Xi | divides |Xi−1 | for each i > 1, any element
of S with order dividing |Xr | belongs to X1 × · · · × Xr−1 . In particular, we have
y ∈ X1 × · · · × Xr−1 . Let Q := {(uc , γ(u)e ) | u ∈ S1 }. Since Q is the image
of a nontrivial algebraic homomorphism from S1 to S × V , it is a subtorus with
60                                    OLIVIER FRÉCON


dimension one. Moreover, Q contains x, and since S ∩ Xr = 1, no element of S ∩ Q
has order dividing |Xr |. But we have S ∩ Q = S1 ∩ Q = {uc | u ∈ S1 , ue = 1}, and
e divides |Xr |, hence each element of S ∩ Q has order dividing e and |Xr |. This
proves that S ∩ Q = 1, and we may choose Tr to be Q. Thus, as claimed, there
exists a direct product T1 × · · · × Tr of subtori of T with dimension one, such that
Ti contains Xi for each i.
    In the same way, there exists a direct product T10 × · · · × Tr0 of subtori of T
with dimension one, such that Ti0 contains Yi for each i. Let T0 (resp. T00 ) be an
algebraic complement of T1 × · · · × Tr (resp. T10 × · · · × Tr0 ) in T . Then T0 and
T00 are two tori of dimension dim(T ) − r, so there is an isomorphism of algebraic
groups ϕ0 : T0 → T00 . For each i = 1, . . . , r, let ϕi : Ti → Ti0 be an isomorphism
of algebraic groups. Since T = T0 × T1 × · · · × Tr = T00 × T10 × · · · × Tr0 , the map
ϕ0 : T → T , defined by ϕ0 (ui ) = ϕi (ui ) for each i and each ui ∈ Ti , is an algebraic
automorphism of T . Moreover, for each i, the subgroup Xi (resp. Yi ) is the only
subgroup of Ti (resp. Ti0 ) of order |Xi | = |Yi |, so we have ϕ0 (Xi ) = Yi for each i.
    For each i = 1, . . . , r, let xi be a generator of Xi . Then, for each i, ϕ0 (xi ) and
δ(xi ) are two elements of order |Xi | in Ti0 , so there is a field automorphism βi of
Q such that (ϕ0 ◦ βi )(xi ) = δ(xi ). Let ϕ be the automorphism of T , defined by
ϕ(u0 ) = ϕ0 (u0 ) for each u0 ∈ T0 , and by ϕ(ui ) = (ϕ0 ◦ βi )(ui ) for each i = 1, . . . , r.
Thus ϕ is a quasi-standard automorphism of T , and it satisfies ϕ(x) = δ(x) for each
x ∈ X, as desired. 

                                                 −1                       ∗
Lemma 8.13. – For each i, the exponent of Yi := γG  (Xi ) ∩ Ci Z(D(G))◦ is ni .
                                                                     −1
  Moreover, Yi is finite and central in D(G), and we have Yi = (γG      (Xi ) ∩
  ∗   −1
Ci )(γG (Xi ) ∩ T (G)).

    Proof – Since Xi ≤ Z(G) is finite and central in G, and since the kernel F of
                          −1
γG is finite, then Yi ≤ γG    (Xi ) is finite and normal in D(G). Moreover, since D(G)
is connected, then Yi is central in D(G).
                         ∗                                −1             ∗
    By the choice of Ci , the exponent of YiC := γG           (Xi ) ∩ Ci is ni . Since we
                            ∗
have Xi ≤ Ci = γG (Ci ), we obtain Xi = γG (YiC ). Now we consider YiT :=
  −1
γG   (Xi ) ∩ T (G). Since T (G) ∩ F is trivial and since the exponent of Xi is ni , the
exponent of YiT divides ni , and we have just to prove that YiC YiT contains Yi .
                                                ∗
    Let u ∈ Yi . Then there exist c ∈ Ci and z ∈ Z(D(G))◦ such that u = cz.
                       ∗
Since we have γG (Ci ) = Ci and γG (Z(D(G))◦ ) = γG (Z(D(G)))◦ = Z(G)◦ , we
find γG (c) ∈ Ci and γG (c) = γG (u)γG (z −1 ) ∈ Xi Z(G)◦ = Z(G)◦ . Thus we
                                                                                        ∗
obtain γG (c) ∈ Ci ∩ Z(G)◦ = G0i = (G◦i )0 = Ci0 , and there exists c0 ∈ (Ci )0
                                                                                    ∗
such that γG (c) = γG (c0 ). Now we have u = (cc0−1 )(c0 z) with cc0−1 ∈ Ci and
           ∗
c0 z ∈ (Ci )0 Z(D(G))◦ . Since we have γG (cc0−1 ) = γG (c)γG (c0 )−1 = 1 ∈ Xi , we find
cc0−1 ∈ YiC . Consequently, we have just to prove that c0 z belongs to YiC YiT .
                                                  ∗        ∗
    Since D(G) is the direct product of C1 , . . . , Cn and of T (G), the subgroup
                                                ∗             ∗
Z(D(G))◦ is the direct product of Z(C1 )◦ , . . . , Z(Cn )◦ and of T (G). Moreover
                                ∗ 0                 ∗ ◦                ∗
Lemma 8.5 implies that (Ci ) contains Z(Ci ) , therefore (Ci )0 Z(D(G))◦ is the
                       ∗                                       ∗
direct product of (Ci )0 , T (G) and of the groups Z(Ck )◦ for k 6= i. But, for each
                                   ∗ ◦                                                ∗
k 6= i, the torsion part of Z(Ck ) is contained in the maximal torus Tk of Z(Ck )◦ ,
                                ∗ ◦                       ∗ 0
and Tk is trivial since Z(Ck ) is contained in (Ck ) by Lemma 8.5. Hence the
                     ∗                                  ∗
torsion part of (Ci )0 Z(D(G))◦ is contained in (Ci )0 × T (G).
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                               61

                                            −1
    Since Xi and F are finite, then γG         (Xi ) is finite too, and since γG (c0 z) =
γG (c)γG (z) = γG (u) belongs to Xi , the element c0 z is of finite order. Thus c0 z
                 ∗                                          ∗
belongs to (Ci )0 × T (G), and there exist d ∈ (Ci )0 and t ∈ T (G) such that
 0                              0
c z = dt. Moreover, since c z has finite order, the elements d and t have finite
orders too. Now we find γG (t) = γG (d)−1 γG (c0 z) ∈ Ci0 Xi = Ci0 , and γG (t) ∈
Ci0 ∩ γG (T (G)) ≤ Ci0 ∩ Z(G)◦ , so γG (t) is a torsion element of Ci0 ∩ Z(G)◦ and γG (t)
belongs to Xi . This proves that t belongs to YiT . Furthermore, this proves that
γG (d) = γG (c0 z)γG (t)−1 belongs to Xi , so we obtain d ∈ YiC and c0 z = dt belongs
to YiC YiT , as desired. 

Theorem 8.14. – Let H be an affine algebraic group over Q. If H and G are
abstractly isomorphic, then there is a quasi-standard automorphism α of D(G),
and an isomorphism of algebraic groups between H and
                          t
      • D(G)/α(F ) × Q+ for an integer t if G0 does not contains Z(G)◦ ;
      • D(G)/α(F ) if G0 contains Z(G)◦ .

   Proof – Let δ0 : G → H be an abstract isomorphism. Since H and G are
abstractly isomorphic, and since G is connected, then H is connected too and, in
the ACF -expansion of the pure group H, we find interpretable fields L1 , . . . , Ln
such that Li is not definably isomorphic to Lj for each i 6= j, and such that
H/Z(H) is definably linear over L1 , . . . , Ln . For each i, we denote by Hi /Z(H) the
largest connected subgroup of H/Z(H) definably linear over Li . We may assume
Hi = δ0 (Gi ) for each i. Moreover, since H ≃ G, we may assume D(H) = D(G), and
                                                     ∗         ∗
even that T (H) = T (G) and that the groups C1 , . . . , Cn for H are the same that
                                                                      t
for G. Let t be the integer such that Z(H)◦ H 0 /H 0 and T (H)×Q+ are isomorphic as
algebraic groups. Then we consider the natural surjective algebraic homomorphism
                t                     −1             ∗              t
γH : D(H) × Q+ → H. It satisfies γH      (Hi ) = Ci Z(D(H) × Q+ ) for each i, and its
kernel E is a central finite subgroup of D(H) = D(G), and it verifies E ∩ T (H) = 1.
   By Lemma 8.10, the quotient D(G)/F (resp. D(G)/E) is abstractly isomorphic
to G (resp. H), so there is an abstract isomorphism δ : D(G)/F → D(G)/E. We
notice that, if G0 contains Z(G)◦ , then we have s = 0, and H 0 contains Z(H)◦
too, so t = 0. Hence, in all the cases, we have just to prove that there is a
quasi-standard automorphism α of D(G) such that D(G)/E and D(G)/α(F ) are
isomorphic as algebraic groups. In particular, since G and D(G)/F (resp. H and
D(H)/E) are abstractly isomorphic by Lemma 8.10, we may assume G = D(G)/F
(resp. H = D(H)/E), and δ = δ0 . Thus we have s = 0 and t = 0, and Hi = δ(Gi )
for each i. From now on, the main difficulty for the proof is to find a quasi-standard
automorphism α of D(G) such that D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ α(F ) and D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ E
are isomorphic as algebraic groups.
                                       ∗                 −1            −1
   For each i, we consider Pi := Ci Z(D(G)) = γG            (Gi ) = γH    (Hi ). Then, for
each i, we have Gi = Pi /F , Hi = Pi /E, and δ(Pi /F ) = Pi /E. Let ZF /F :=
Z(G) = Z(D(G)/F ) and ZE /E := Z(H) = Z(D(G)/E). Then [D(G), ZF ] is a
connected subgroup of the finite subgroup F , so ZF is central in D(G), and since
it contains Z(D(G)), we obtain ZF = Z(D(G)). In the same way, for each central
finite subgroup Y of D(G), we have Z(D(G)/Y ) = Z(D(G))/Y . In particular,
we obtain ZE = Z(D(G)). Now the algebraic groups Pi /Z(D(G)), Gi /Z(G) and
Hi /Z(H) are isomorphic. Moreover, since G/Z(G) is the direct product of the
62                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


groups G1 /Z(G), . . . , Gn /Z(G), we have
              D(G)/Z(D(G))        = P1 /Z(D(G)) × · · · × Pn /Z(D(G)).
But, for each i, in the ACF -expansion of the pure group G, the quotient Gi /Z(G)
is definably linear over Ki , so Fact 3.6 says that the isomorphism from Gi /Z(G)
to Hi /Z(H) induced by δ is a standard isomorphism. Hence, for each i, since
Pi /Z(D(G)), Gi /Z(G) and Hi /Z(H) are isomorphic as algebraic groups, the auto-
morphism δi∗ of Pi /Z(D(G)) induced by δ, is a standard automorphism. In other
words, for each i, there is a field automorphism ϕi of Q, such that the automorphism
δiϕ := δi∗ ◦ ϕ−1
              i  of Pi /Z(D(G)) is algebraic over Q.
     We fix i, and we consider the preimage Ω of the graph of δiϕ in Pi × Qi . It
is an algebraic subgroup and, since Pi /Z(D(G)) ≃ Gi /Z(G) is connected, then
Ω/(Z(D(G)) × Z(D(G))) is connected too, and we have Ω = Ω◦ (Z(D(G)) ×
Z(D(G))).
                                      −1            ∗               −1
     We consider the group YiH := γH     (XiH ) ∩ Ci Z(D(G))◦ = γH      (XiH ) ∩ Pi◦ , where
   H                                ◦     0                                    −1
Xi is the torsion part of Z(H) ∩ Hi . Then we have δ(Yi F/F ) = δ(γG              (Xi )/F ∩
    ∗          ◦              −1                  ∗        ◦
Ci Z(D(G)) F/F ) = δ(γG (Xi )/F ) ∩ δ(Ci Z(D(G)) F/F ). But we have G =
                 −1
D(G)/F , so γG      (Xi )/F is precisely Xi , that is the torsion part of Z(G)◦ ∩ G0i .
             −1                                                              −1
Hence δ(γG (Xi )/F ) is the torsion part of Z(H)◦ ∩ Hi0 , that is δ(γG          (Xi )/F ) =
                                       ∗                             ∗
XiH . Moreover, we have Pi = Ci Z(D(G)), so we find δ(Ci Z(D(G))◦ F/F ) =
                                                                            −1
δ(Pi◦ F/F ) = Pi◦ E/E, and we obtain δ(Yi F/F ) = XiH ∩ Pi◦ E/E = (γH          (XiH )/E) ∩
    ◦            −1     H        ◦          H
(Pi E/E) = (γH (Xi ) ∩ Pi )E/E = Yi E/E. Thus, the isomorphism δ induces
an isomorphism δi∗ : Pi◦ F/Yi F → Pi◦ E/YiH E and, since we have Pi◦ ∩ F ≤ Yi ≤
Pi◦ and Pi◦ ∩ E ≤ YiH ≤ Pi◦ , the isomorphism δ induces an isomorphism δi0 :
Pi◦ /Yi → Pi◦ /YiH . We consider the isomorphism δi := δi0 ◦ ϕ−1       i   from Pi◦ /Yi to
Pi /Yi . Let δi be the isomorphism from Pi /Z(D(G)) Yi to Pi /Z(D(G))◦ YiH
   ◦    H                                           ◦           ◦         ◦

induced by δi . Since Z(D(G))◦ Yi and Z(D(G))◦ YiH have finite index in Z(D(G)),
then the graph of δi has finite index in Ω/(Z(D(G))◦ Yi × Z(D(G))◦ YiH ), because
Ω/(Z(D(G)) × Z(D(G))) is the graph of δiϕ . Since Q is an algebraically closed field
and of characteristic zero, the connected algebraic groups over Q have no proper
subgroup of finite index. In particular, Pi◦ /Z(D(G))◦ Yi has no proper subgroup of
finite index, so the graph of δi has no proper subgroup of finite index. Moreover,
by considering ΩY := Ω◦ (Yi × YiH ) and ZY := Z(D(G))◦ Yi × Z(D(G))◦ YiH , then
the group ΩY /ZY is connected, so ΩY /ZY has no proper subgroup of finite index.
This implies that the graph of δi is ΩY /ZY . In particular, δi is an isomorphism of
algebraic groups.
     Let Θ denote the preimage in Pi◦ × Pi◦ of the graph of δi . Then we have ΩY =
Θ ZY , and Ω0Y (Yi × YiH )/(Yi × YiH ) = Θ0 (Yi × YiH )/(Yi × YiH ) is the graph of the
restriction of δi to (Pi◦ )0 /Yi . Moreover, since ZY Ω0Y /Ω0Y (Yi × YiH ) is a connected
algebraic subgroup of the connected abelian group ΩY /Ω0Y (Yi × YiH ), it has an
algebraic complement W0 /Ω0Y (Yi × YiH ).
                                                   ∗
   (1) The algebraic groups W := W0◦ and Ci are isomorphic, and W ∩ (Zi × Pi◦ )
and W ∩ (Pi◦ × Zi ) are trivial. Moreover, the image of the first (resp. the second)
projection of W (Zi × Zi ) in Pi◦ × Pi◦ is surjective.
                                                       ∗
  For each k, let Zk := T (G) × (×j6=k Z(Cj )◦ ). Then we have Z(D(G))◦ =
    ∗
Z(Ck )◦ × Zk for each k. Let ZW := Zi Yi × Zi YiH ≤ Pi◦ × Pi◦ . Since Lemma 8.5
                      ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                             63

           ∗            ∗
gives Z(Ci )◦ ≤ (Ci )0 , we obtain ZY ≤ ((Pi◦ )0 × (Pi◦ )0 )ZW . Then W0 ((Pi◦ )0 ×
(Pi◦ )0 )ZW contains Ω◦ ≤ ΩY and, since ΩY /ZY is the graph of the isomorphism δi :
Pi◦ /Z(D(G))◦ Yi → Pi◦ /Z(D(G))◦ YiH , its first (resp. second) projection in Pi◦ × Pi◦
is surjective. Moreover, since Ω0Y (Yi × YiH )/(Yi × YiH ) = Θ0 (Yi × YiH )/(Yi × YiH ) is
the graph of the restriction to (Pi◦ )0 Yi /Yi of the isomorphism δi : Pi◦ /Yi → Pi◦ /YiH ,
the first (resp. second) projection of W0 Ω0Y ZW in Pi◦ × Pi◦ is surjective too. But
W0 contains Ω0Y , so we have (W0 Ω0Y ZW )◦ = (W0 ZW )◦ ≤ W ZW , and since Pi◦ is
connected, the first (resp. second) projection of W ZW in Pi◦ × Pi◦ is surjective.
                                    ∗
    We verify that rk(W ) = rk(Ci ). We have
         rk(W )      = rk(W0 )
                     = rk(W0 /Ω0Y (Yi × YiH )) + rk(Ω0Y (Yi × YiH ))
                     = (rk(ΩY /Ω0Y (Yi × YiH )) − rk(ZY Ω0Y /Ω0Y (Yi × YiH )))
                       +rk(Ω0Y (Yi × YiH )),

and since Yi ×YiH is finite, we obtain rk(W ) = rk(ΩY )−rk(ZY Ω0Y /Ω0Y ) = rk(ΩY )−
(rk(ZY ) − rk(ZY ∩ Ω0Y )). Moreover, by definition of Ω, we have

      rk(ΩY )    =    rk(Ω)
                 =    rk(Ω/(Z(D(G)) × Z(D(G)))) + rk(Z(D(G)) × Z(D(G)))
                 =    rk(Pi /Z(D(G))) + rk(ZY )
                 =    rk(Pi◦ /Z(D(G))◦ Yi ) + rk(ZY )
                            ∗
                 =    rk(Ci Z(D(G))◦ /Z(D(G))◦ ) + rk(ZY )
                            ∗    ∗
                 =    rk(Ci /(Ci ∩ Z(D(G))◦ )) + rk(ZY )
                            ∗        ∗
                 =    rk(Ci ) − rk(Ci ∩ Z(D(G))◦ ) + rk(ZY ),
                                              ∗
and since D(G) is the direct product of Ci by another connected algebraic group,
                                 ∗           ∗
we obtain rk(ΩY ) = rk(Ci ) − rk(Z(Ci )◦ ) + rk(ZY ). Since for each central fi-
nite subgroup Y of D(G) we have Z(D(G)/Y ) = Z(D(G))/Y , then we have
Z(D(G)/Yi ) = Z(D(G))/Yi . Since D(G) is the central product of the groups
P1 , . . . , Pn , we have Z(Pi◦ /Yi ) = Z(D(G)/Yi ) ∩ Pi◦ /Yi . Therefore, since Pi con-
tains Z(D(G)), we obtain
Z(Pi◦ /Yi )◦ = (Z(D(G)/Yi )∩Pi◦ /Yi )◦ = (Z(D(G))/Yi ∩Pi◦ /Yi )◦ = Z(D(G))◦ Yi /Yi .
In the same way, we have Z(Pi◦ /YiH )◦ = Z(D(G))◦ YiH /YiH , so

                       δi (Z(D(G))◦ Yi /Yi ) = Z(D(G))◦ YiH /YiH .
Since Ω0Y (Yi × YiH )/(Yi × YiH ) = Θ0 (Yi × YiH )/(Yi × YiH ) is the graph of the
restriction to (Pi◦ )0 Yi /Yi of δi , the latter proves that (ZY ∩ Ω0Y )Yi /Yi is the graph
of the restriction to (Z(D(G))◦ Yi ∩ (Pi◦ )0 Yi )/Yi of δi . Now, since Yi × YiH is finite,
we have rk(ZY ∩ Ω0Y ) = rk(Z(D(G))◦ Yi ∩ (Pi◦ )0 Yi ) = rk(Z(D(G))◦ ∩ (Pi◦ )0 ) =
                       ∗                 ∗         ∗
rk(Z(D(G))◦ ∩ (Ci )0 ) = rk(Z(Ci )◦ ∩ (Ci )0 ), and since Lemma 8.5 implies that
    ∗ 0                  ∗ ◦                                       ∗
(Ci ) contains Z(Ci ) , we obtain rk(ZY ∩ Ω0Y ) = rk(Z(Ci )◦ ), and

     rk(W )     = rk(ΩY ) − rk(ZY ) + rk(ZY ∩ Ω0Y )
                        ∗            ∗                                  ∗
                = (rk(Ci ) − rk(Z(Ci )◦ ) + rk(ZY )) − rk(ZY ) + rk(Z(Ci )◦ )
                       ∗
                = rk(Ci ),
as claimed.
64                                    OLIVIER FRÉCON


   We show that W/(W ∩ (Yi × YiH )) and Ci are isomorphic as algebraic groups.
Indeed, there is an isomorphism of algebraic groups between Ci and
            −1        −1          ∗  −1        −1              ∗−1                ∗
           γG  (Ci )/γG  (Xi ) = Ci γG  (Xi )/γG  (Xi ) ≃ Ci /(γG  (Xi ) ∩ Ci ),
                             ∗                   ∗                   −1                   ∗
and since we have Pi◦ = Ci Z(D(G))◦ = Ci ×Zi , the groups Pi◦ /(γG      (Xi )∩Ci )Zi
                                                                            −1
and Ci are isomorphic as algebraic groups. Thus, since Zi contains γG          (Xi ) ∩
                                                   ◦
T (G) ≤ T (G), the algebraic groups Ci and Pi /Yi Zi are isomorphic by Lemma
8.13, so Ci and (Pi◦ × Pi◦ )/(Yi Zi × Pi◦ ) are isomorphic too. Now, since the first
projection of W ZW in Pi◦ ×Pi◦ is surjective, that is W ZW ({1}×Pi◦ ) = Pi◦ ×Pi◦ , the
algebraic groups Ci and W ZW /(W ZW ∩ (Yi Zi × Pi◦ )) are isomorphic. Hence, since
ZW is contained in Yi Zi × Pi◦ , the algebraic groups Ci and W/(W ∩ (Yi Zi × Pi◦ )) =
W/(W ∩(W ZW ∩(Yi Zi ×Pi◦ ))) are isomorphic. In particular, since we have rk(W ) =
       ∗
rk(Ci ) = rk(Ci ) by the previous paragraph, the intersection W ∩ (Yi Zi × Pi◦ ) is
finite. Since ΩY /ZY is the graph of δi , we have ΩY ∩ (Z(D(G))◦ Yi × Pi◦ ) = ZY and
W ∩ (Yi Zi × Pi◦ ) ≤ ΩY ∩ (Z(D(G))◦ Yi × Pi◦ ) is contained in W ∩ ZY ≤ W0 ∩ ZY ≤
Ω0Y (Yi × YiH ), so we find

     W ∩ (Yi Zi × Pi◦ ) ≤ W ∩ ZY
                        ≤ ZY ∩ Ω0Y (Yi × YiH ))
                        ≤ (Z(D(G))◦ Yi ∩ (Pi◦ )0 Yi ) × (Z(D(G))◦ YiH ∩ (Pi◦ )0 YiH ).

Let WP (resp. WQ ) be the image of the finite group W ∩ (Yi Zi × Pi◦ ) by the first
(resp. the second) projection in Pi◦ × Pi◦ . Then WP F/F is a finite subgroup of
 (Z(D(G))◦ Yi ∩ (Pi◦ )0 Yi )F/F       =   (Z(D(G))◦ Yi F/F ) ∩ ((Pi◦ )0 Yi F/F )
                                      =   (γG (Z(D(G)))◦ γG (Yi )) ∩ ((γG (Pi )◦ )0 γG (Yi ))
                                      ≤   (Z(G)◦ Xi ) ∩ ((G◦i )0 Xi )
                                      =   Z(G)◦ ∩ G0i ,
                                                              −1
so WP F/F is contained in Xi , and WP is contained in γG         (Xi ) ∩ Pi◦ = Yi . In the
same way we obtain WQ ≤ Yi , so we have W ∩ (Yi Zi × Pi◦ ) ≤ Yi × YiH . Thus
                                   H

W/(W ∩ (Yi × YiH )) and Ci are isomorphic as algebraic groups.
                              ∗
    We prove that W and Ci are isomorphic as algebraic groups, and that W ∩(Zi ×
  ◦                ◦
Pi ) and W ∩ (Pi × Zi ) are trivial. Since the exponent of Yi × YiH is ni by Lemma
8.13, and since W/(W ∩(Yi ×YiH )) and Ci are isomorphic as algebraic groups, there
                           ∗
is an isogeny ι1 from Ci to W . Since the first projection of W ZW in Pi◦ × Pi◦ is
surjective, and since Pi◦ is connected, the first projection of W (Zi × Zi ) in Pi◦ × Pi◦
is surjective too. Thus we have Pi◦ × Pi◦ = (W (Zi × Zi ))({1} × Pi◦ ) = W (Zi × Pi◦ ).
                                ∗
Then, since we have Pi◦ = Ci ×Zi , the algebraic groups W (Zi ×Pi◦ )/(Zi ×Pi◦ ) and
   ∗                                                     ∗
Ci are isomorphic, so W/(W ∩ (Zi × Pi◦ )) and Ci are isomorphic too. Therefore,
                                  ∗                                         ∗
since we have rk(W ) = rk(Ci ), there is an isogeny ι2 from W to Ci with kernel
                                                           ∗     ∗
W ∩ (Zi × Pi◦ ). Now ι2 ◦ ι1 is an isogeny from Ci to Ci . Since ker(ι2 ◦ ι1 ) is
                     ∗                                         ∗
finite and since Ci is connected, the preimage of Z(Ci ) by ι2 ◦ ι1 is precisely
      ∗                                                            ∗
Z(Ci ). In particular, if XC denotes the torsion part of Z(Ci ), then XC contains
ker(ι2 ◦ ι1 ), and XC / ker(ι2 ◦ ι1 ) is isomorphic to XC . But Lemma 8.5 implies that
    ∗                  ∗               ∗
(Ci )0 contains Z(Ci )◦ , so Z(Ci )◦ has no nontrivial torus, and it is torsion-free.
Hence XC is finite and ker(ι2 ◦ ι1 ) is trivial. Thus ι2 ◦ ι1 is an automorphism
      ∗                                                ∗                             ∗
of Ci , and ι2 is an isomorphism from W to Ci . In particular, W and Ci are
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                             65


isomorphic as algebraic groups, and since the kernel of ι2 is W ∩ (Zi × Pi◦ ), we have
W ∩ (Zi × Pi◦ ) = 1. In the same way, we obtain W ∩ (Pi◦ × Zi ) = 1.

    (2) Pi◦ is the direct product of Zi by Ri (resp. Si ), the first (resp. the second)
projection in Pi◦ × Pi◦ is surjective, and W is the graph of an isomorphism of
algebraic groups ωi : Ri → Si .

    Since we have W ∩ ({1} × Si ) ≤ W ∩ (Zi × Pi◦ ) = 1 and W ∩ (Ri × {1}) ≤
W ∩ (Pi◦ × Zi ) = 1, the algebraic group W is the graph of an isomorphism ωi :
Ri → Si of algebraic groups. Moreover, since we have W ∩ (Zi × Pi◦ ) = 1 (resp.
W ∩ (Pi◦ × Zi ) = 1), then Ri ∩ Zi (resp. Si ∩ Zi ) is trivial. Therefore, since the
first (resp. the second) projection of W (Zi × Zi ) in Pi◦ × Pi◦ is surjective, then Pi◦
is the direct product of Ri by Zi (resp. Si by Zi ).

    (3) D(G) is the direct product of T (G) and of the groups Rk (resp. Sk ) for
k ∈ {1, . . . , n}.
                                                         ∗
   We note that, for each k, since we have Pk◦ = Ck × Zk = Rk × Zk , we find
     ∗                 ∗                 ∗
(Ck )0 = Rk0 , Z(Ck ) = Z(Pk◦ ) ∩ Ck and Z(Rk ) = Z(Pk◦ ) ∩ Rk . Therefore, since
     ∗ 0                  ∗ ◦                                ∗                  ∗
(Ck ) contains Z(Ck ) (Lemma 8.5), then Rk ≥ (Ck )0 contains Z(Ck )◦ , and
                         ∗                                 ∗
Z(Rk ) contains Z(Ck )◦ . But we have Z(Pk◦ ) = Z(Ck ) × Zk = Z(Rk ) × Zk , hence
                                ∗                                              Qn
we obtain Z(Rk )◦ = Z(Ck )◦ for each k. In particular, the product T (G)( j=1 Rj )
contains Zk = T (G) × (×j6=k Z(Rj )◦ ) for each k, and since Pk◦ is the direct product
                                                         ∗
of Rk by Zk for    Qneach k, this product contains Ck for each k. Thus we have
D(G) = T (G)( j=1 Rj ). Since D(G) is the central product of T (G) and of the
                   ∗
groups Pj = Cj Z(D(G)) for j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, and since Rj is contained in Pj for each
j, then D(G) the central product of T (G) and of the groups Rj for j ∈ {1, . . . , n}.
This implies that that Z(D(G)) is the product of the groups T (G) and Z(Rj ) for j ∈
                                                               ∗
{1, . . . , n}. Moreover, since the algebraic groups Rk and Ck are isomorphic for each
                                                                ∗
k, and since D(G) is the direct product of T (G) and of Cj for j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, we
                                  Pn           ∗               Pn
have rk(D(G)) = rk(T (G))+ j=1 rk(Cj ) = rk(T (G))+ j=1 rk(Rj ). Therefore,
                                                   Q
for each k, the intersection Ik := Rk ∩ (T (G) j6=k Rj ) is finite. Since D(G) is the
central product of T (G) and of the groups Rj for j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, then Ik is central
in Rk .
                              ∗                  ∗
   For each k, since (Ck )0 contains Z(Ck )◦ by Lemma 8.5, the maximal torus
             ∗ ◦                     ∗ ◦
of Z(Ck ) is trivial, and Z(Ck ) is torsion-free. Consequently, for each k, the
                               ∗                     ∗
torsion part JkC of Z(Ck ) is finite, and Z(Ck ) is the direct product of JkC by
        ∗                                                       ∗
Z(Ck )◦ . But, for each k, the algebraic groups Rk and Ck are isomorphic, hence
Z(Rk ) is the direct product of its torsion part Jk ≃ Jk by Z(Rk )◦ . Since D(G) is
                                                           C
                                                                   ∗
the direct product of T (G) ≤ Z(D(G))◦ and of the groups Cj for j ∈ {1, . . . , n},
                                                                             ∗
then Z(D(G)) is the direct product of T (G) and of the groups Z(Cj ) for j ∈
                                                                   ◦
{1, . . . , n}. Thus Z(D(G)) is the direct product of Z(D(G))  Pn and    of the
                                                                             Pngroups
Jj for j ∈ {1, . . . , n}. In particular, its Morley degree is j=1 |JjC | = j=1 |Jj |.
  C

Since Z(D(G)) is the product of the groups T (G) and Z(Rj ) for j ∈ {1, . . . , n},
and since Z(Rj ) is the direct product of Jj by Z(Rj )◦ for each j, then Z(D(G)) is
                             ◦
the product   Pnof Z(D(G)) and of the groups Jj for j ∈ {1, . . . , n}. But◦ its Morley
degree is k=1 |Jj |, hence Z(D(G)) is the direct product of Z(D(G)) and of the
groups Jj for j ∈ {1, . . . , n}.
66                                OLIVIER FRÉCON


   Now we consider k ∈ {1, . . . , n} and x ∈QIk . Then there are u ∈ T (G) and
xj ∈ Rj for each j 6= k such that x = u j6=k xj . Let xk := x−1 . Then we
        Qn
have u j=1 xj = 1 and, for each j, we find xj = u−1 l6=j xl ∈ Ij . For each
                                                              Q
j, since Ij is a finite central subgroup of Rj , we have Ij ≤ Jj . But we have
u ∈ T (G) ≤ Z(D(G))◦ , and Z(D(G)) is the direct product of Z(D(G))◦ and of
the groups Jj for j ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Hence we find u = 1 and xj = 1 for each j. In
particular, x and Ik are trivial. Thus D(G) is the direct product of T (G) and of
the groups Rk for k ∈ {1, . . . , n}, as desired. In the same way, D(G) is the direct
product of T (G) and of the groups Sk for k ∈ {1, . . . , n}.

     (4) Determination of the quasi-standard automorphism α of D(G).
                                     ∗
   Since, for each j, the group Z(Cj )◦ is torsion-free, and since Z(D(G))◦ is the
                                                    ∗
direct product of T (G) and of the groups Z(Cj )◦ for j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, then the
torsion part S of T (G) is the one of Z(D(G))◦ . Since we have ZF = ZE = Z(D(G)),
then SF/F (resp. SE/E) is the torsion part of Z(D(G)/F )◦ (resp. Z(D(G)/E)◦ ),
and we obtain δ(SF/F ) = SE/E. Moreover, since F ∩ T (G) = E ∩ T (G) = 1, the
automorphism δ induces an automorphism δS of S such that δ(xF ) = δS (x)E for
each x ∈ S.
                                                                          ∗
   Let X := T (G) ∩ D(G)0 F . Since we have T (G) ∩ D(G)0 = T (G) ∩ (C1 × · · · ×
   ∗
Cn )0 = 1, then X is a finite subgroup of T (G), and it is contained in S ≤ T (G).
If S = 1, we denote by ϕX the identity map of T (G). Otherwise T (G) is a torus,
and Lemma 8.12 provides a quasi-standard automorphism ϕX of T (G) such that
ϕX (x) = δS (x) for each x ∈ X. We consider the automorphism α of D(G) defined
as follows: for each j, for each x ∈ Rj , α(x) = (ωj ◦ ϕj )(x); for each x ∈ T (G),
α(x) = ϕX (x). Thus α is a quasi-standard automorphism of D(G).

    (5) D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ α(F ) and D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ E are isomorphic as algebraic
groups.

   Let α : D(G)/F → D(G)/α(F ) be the abstract isomorphism induced by α, and
let ν = δ ◦ α−1 . For each i, we have

 α(Pi /F ) = α(Pi )/α(F ) = α(Ri Z(D(G)))/α(F ) = Si Z(D(G))/α(F ) = Pi /α(F ),

and ν(Pi /α(F )) = δ(Pi /F ) = Pi /E. We show that the map

                  ν : D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ α(F ) → D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ E

induced by ν is an isomorphism of algebraic groups. We consider the abstract iso-
morphism αZ : D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ F → D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ α(F ) induced by α, and let
δ : D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ F → D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ E be the abstract isomorphism induced
by δ. For each i, we denote by ν i : Pi◦ α(F )/Z(D(G))◦ α(F ) → Pi◦ E/Z(D(G))◦ E
the restriction of ν to Pi◦ α(F )/Z(D(G))◦ α(F ). For each i, since the subgroup
Ri (resp. Si ) covers Pi◦ F/Z(D(G))◦ F (resp. Pi◦ α(F )/Z(D(G))◦ α(F )), and since
ωi : Ri → Si satisfies

      ωi (Ri ∩ Z(D(G))◦ F ) = ωi (Ri ) ∩ α(Z(D(G))◦ F ) = Si ∩ Z(D(G))◦ α(F ),

then ωi induces an isomorphism of algebraic groups

                ω i : Pi◦ F/Z(D(G))◦ F → Pi◦ α(F )/Z(D(G))◦ α(F ).
                   ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            67


Thus, for each i and each x ∈ Pi◦ α(F )/Z(D(G))◦ α(F ), we have ν i (x) = (δ ◦
(αZ )−1 )(x) = (δ ◦ ϕ−1    −1
                     i ◦ ω i )(x), so we obtain

                                   ν i = (δ ◦ ϕ−1     −1
                                               i ) ◦ ωi .

But, for each i, we have
            −1             ∗          −1
      Yi = γG  (Xi ) ∩ Ci Z(D(G))◦ ≤ γG  (Z(G)◦ ) ∩ Pi◦ = Z(D(G))◦ F ∩ Pi◦ ,
                  −1           ∗
and F ∩Pi◦ ≤ γG        (Xi )∩Ci Z(D(G))◦ = Yi , so we have Z(D(G))◦ Yi = Z(D(G))◦ F ∩
Pi , and in the same way, Z(D(G))◦ YiH = Z(D(G))◦ E ∩ Pi◦ . Hence the isomor-
  ◦

phism δ ◦ ϕ−1i     : Pi◦ F/Z(D(G))◦ F → Pi◦ E/Z(D(G))◦ E is induced by δi , and it is
algebraic. Since ω i is an isomorphism of algebraic groups too, this proves that ν i
is an isomorphism of algebraic groups. Since D(G) is generated by the subgroups
Pi◦ for i = 1, . . . , n, the map ν is an isomorphism of algebraic groups, as desired.
   (6) Final argument.
   Let ∆ be the preimage of the graph of ν in D(G) × D(G), and let ZD =
Z(D(G))◦ α(F )×Z(D(G))◦ E. Then ∆ZD /ZD is the graph of ν, so it is an algebraic
group and, since D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ α(F ) is connected, ∆ZD /ZD is connected. More-
over, since ZD /(α(F ) × E) is connected too, ∆ZD /(α(F ) × E) is connected. We
have (∆ZD /(α(F )×E))0 = ∆0 (α(F )×E)/(α(F )×E), so ∆0 (α(F )×E)/(α(F )×E)
is a connected algebraic subgroup of ∆ZD /(α(F ) × E).
   We consider the diagonal ∆0 of T (G) × T (G), and let ρ be the isomorphism
from T (G)α(F )/α(F ) to T (G)E/E whose graph is ∆0 (α(F ) × E)/(α(F ) × E).
Let u ∈ D(G)0 α(F )/α(F ) ∩ T (G)α(F )/α(F ). Then there exists x ∈ X such that
α−1 (u) = xF . Hence we have ν(u) = δ(xF ) = δS (x)E = ϕX (x)E = α(x)E, and
           (u, ν(u)) = (α(x)α(F ), α(x)E) ∈ ∆0 (α(F ) × E)/(α(F ) × E).
Consequently, for each u ∈ D(G)0 α(F )/α(F ) ∩ T (G)α(F )/α(F ), we have ν(u) =
ρ(u), and we can define an isomorphism
                  νρ : D(G)0 T (G)α(F )/α(F ) → D(G)0 T (G)E/E
by νρ (x) = ν(x) for each x ∈ D(G)0 α(F )/α(F ), and νρ (x) = ρ(x) for each x ∈
T (G)α(F )/α(F ). Then the graph of νρ is
                 ∆1 /(α(F ) × E) := ∆0 ∆0 (α(F ) × E)/(α(F ) × E).
Moreover, since ∆0 (α(F ) × E)/(α(F ) × E) and ∆0 (α(F ) × E)/(α(F ) × E) are two
algebraic groups, ∆1 is algebraic, and νρ is an isomorphism of algebraic groups.
   Since ∆1 /(α(F ) × E) is the graph of an isomorphism of algebraic groups be-
tween two connected algebraic groups, it is connected. Since ∆ZD /(α(F ) × E) is
connected, then ∆ZD /∆1 is connected too. But ∆1 contains ∆0 , so ∆ZD /∆1 is
abelian. Hence, since ∆ZD /∆1 and ZD ∆1 /∆1 are connected, there is an algebraic
complement ∆2 /∆1 of ZD ∆1 /∆1 in ∆ZD /∆1 . Now, since ∆ZD /ZD is the graph
of ν, we have ∆ZD /ZD ∩ (D(G) × Z(D(G))◦ E)/ZD = 1 and
                   ∆2 ∩ (D(G) × E) ≤           ∆ZD ∩ (D(G) × E)
                                   =           ZD ∩ (D(G) × E)
                                   =           Z(D(G))◦ α(F ) × E.
68                                 OLIVIER FRÉCON


Consequently we obtain
                   ∆2 ∩ (D(G) × E)   = ∆2 ∩ (Z(D(G))◦ α(F ) × E)
                                     ≤ ∆2 ∩ ZD
                                     ≤ ∆1 .
Finally, , since ∆1 /(α(F ) × E) is the graph of an isomorphism of algebraic groups
from D(G)0 T (G)α(F )/α(F ) to D(G)0 T (G)E/E, we find
                   ∆2 ∩ (D(G) × E) = ∆1 ∩ (D(G) × E) = α(F ) × E.
In the same way, we obtain ∆2 ∩ (α(F ) × D(G)) = α(F ) × E.
                                   ∗                ∗
   Since Lemma 8.5 implies that (Ci )0 contains Z(Ci )◦ for each i, then the sub-
group D(G)0 T (G) contains Z(D(G))◦ . Therefore, for each x ∈ Z(D(G))◦ F/F =
Z(D(G)/F )◦ , there exist d ∈ (D(G)0 F/F ) ∩ (Z(D(G))◦ F/F ) and u ∈ T (G)F/F
such that x = d u, and we have
     νρ (x) = νρ (d)νρ (u) = ν(d)ρ(u) ∈ Z(D(G)/E)◦ · T (G)E/E = Z(D(G))◦ E/E.
The latter proves that νρ (Z(D(G))◦ F/F ) = Z(D(G))◦ E/E. Thus, since the graph
of νρ is ∆1 /(α(F ) × E), the group (∆1 ∩ ZD )/(α(F ) × E) is the graph of the
restriction of νρ to Z(D(G))◦ F/F . Consequently, we obtain
rk(∆1 ∩ ZD ) = rk((∆1 ∩ ZD )/(α(F ) × E)) = rk(Z(D(G))◦ F/F ) = rk(Z(D(G))).
This yields
               rk(ZD ∆1 )   = rk(ZD ) + rk(∆1 ) − rk(∆1 ∩ ZD )
                            = 2rk(Z(D(G))) + rk(∆1 ) − rk(Z(D(G)))
                            = rk(Z(D(G))) + rk(∆1 ).
Moreover, since ∆ZD /ZD is the graph of ν, we have
        rk(∆ZD /ZD ) = rk(D(G)/Z(D(G))◦ α(F )) = rk(D(G)) − rk(Z(D(G)))
and
 rk(∆ZD ) = (rk(D(G)) − rk(Z(D(G)))) + rk(ZD ) = rk(D(G)) + rk(Z(D(G))).
Now, since ∆2 /∆1 is a complement of ZD ∆1 /∆1 in ∆ZD /∆1 , we find
     rk(∆2 )   =   rk(∆ZD /∆1 ) − rk(ZD ∆1 /∆1 ) + rk(∆1 )
               =   rk(∆ZD ) − rk(ZD ∆1 ) + rk(∆1 )
               =   (rk(D(G)) + rk(Z(D(G)))) − (rk(Z(D(G))) + rk(∆1 )) + rk(∆1 )
               =   rk(D(G)).
Since we have ∆2 ∩ (D(G) × E) = α(F ) × E and ∆2 ∩ (α(F ) × D(G)) = α(F ) × E
by the previous paragraph, the latter implies that ∆2 /(α(F ) × E) is the graph of
an isomorphism β from D(G)/α(F ) to D(G)/E. Moreover, β is algebraic since ∆2
is an algebraic group.
   Finally, D(G)/α(F ) and D(G)/E are isomorphic as algebraic groups, as desired.

   We note that Theorem 8.14 together with Lemma 8.10 provide Theorem 1.1 in
the case K = Q.
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            69


                             9. The final argument
   In this section, we fix a connected affine ACF0 -group M = (G, · ,−1 , 1, · · · ),
interpretable in the pure field Q, and an elementary substructure M∗ = (G∗ , · · · )
of M. We note that the structures M and M∗ have finite Morley rank, so any
infinite field, interpretable in M or M∗ , is algebraically closed by a theorem of A.
Macintyre [5, Theorem 8.1].
Lemma 9.1. – Let U ∗ /V ∗ be a definable section of G∗ , and let U/V be its canonical
extension to G. If U/V is definably isomorphic to K+ (resp. K ∗ ) for an infinite
interpretable field K, then U = U ∗ V .
   Proof – In this case, there is an infinite field L, interpretable in M∗ , and
a definable morphism α from U ∗ to L+ (resp. L∗ ), with kernel V ∗ . Then we
have L = M0 /R0 for M0 a definable subset of (G∗ )n , where n is an integer, and
R0 a definable equivalence relation over M0 . We consider the extensions L1 , M1 ,
R1 and α1 to G of L, M0 , R0 and α respectively. Since L1 is an infinite field,
interpretable in Q, then Fact 2.6 says that L1 is isomorphic to Q. Moreover, L
is infinite and interpretable in M∗ , so it is algebraically closed. Since Q has no
proper algebraically closed subfield, this implies that the canonical embedding of L
in L1 is an isomorphism: the subset M0 of M1 covers L1 = M1 /R1 . Thus, for each
u ∈ U , there is u∗ ∈ U ∗ such that α1 (u) = α1 (u∗ ). Since α1 is a morphism with
kernel V , this yields the result. 
   We note that, since G is connected and since its ground field is algebraically
closed and of characteristic zero, there is no proper subgroup of finite index in G.
Proposition 9.2. – G = G∗ Z(G)◦ .
   Proof – Since there is no proper subgroup of finite index in G, we have just
to prove that G = G∗ Z(G). Let B ∗ be a Borel subgroup of G∗ , that is a maximal
solvable connected definable subgroup, and let B be its extension to G. Then
B is a maximal solvable connected definable subgroup of G, so it is an algebraic
Borel subgroup of G by [5, Corollary 5.38] and Lemma 4.1. In particular, we have
Z(B) = Z(G), so Z(B ∗ ) = Z(G∗ ). Moreover, since B is the extension of B ∗ , we
have B = d(B ∗ ). Let D = D/Z(G) be the largest connected definable subgroup of
B = B/Z(G) contained in B ∗ = B ∗ Z(G)/Z(G). Then D is normal in B ∗ , so D is
normal in B.
   If D = B ∗ , then we have B ∗ = B. Since the conjugates of B cover G, the
ones of B ∗ in G∗ cover G∗ . In particular, G∗ = G∗ Z(G)/Z(G) is generated by
the conjugates of D in G∗ . Now, since D is definable in G and connected, G∗ is a
connected definable subgroup of G. Since G∗ is an elementary substructure of G,
this proves that G∗ = G, and G = G∗ Z(G). Hence we may assume D 6= B ∗ .
   Let D0∗ /Z(G∗ ) be the largest connected definable subgroup of B ∗ /Z(G∗ ), with
D0 contained in D, and let D0 be its extension to G. Then D0∗ is normal in B ∗ , and
  ∗

D0 /Z(G) is a normal connected definable subgroup of B/Z(G), and D0 is contained
in D. Let U ∗ /D0∗ be a B ∗ -minimal section of B ∗ , and let U be the extension of U ∗
to G. Then U/D0 is a B-minimal section of B. By choice of D0∗ , the subgroups U ∗
and U are not contained in D, and U ∗ /Z(G∗ ) and U/Z(G) are connected.
   If U/D0 is definably isomorphic to K+ or K ∗ for an infinite interpretable field
K, then Lemma 9.1 gives U = U ∗ D0 . But this implies that U is contained in B ∗ D,
hence U/Z(G) is contained in B ∗ , contradicting the maximality of D.
70                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


    If the Fitting subgroup F (B) covers U/D0 , then U/D0 is definably isomorphic to
a section of F (B)/Z(B). But F (B)/Z(B) is a U      e -group by Fact 2.21, hence U/D0 is
a U -group by Fact 2.19. Since Q is algebraically closed of characteristic zero, there is
   e
no infinite definable group of bounded exponent in F (B)/Z(B), and Fact 2.17 shows
that F (B)/Z(B) is torsion-free. In particular, U/D0 is torsion-free. Consequently,
by B-minimality of U/D0 , Fact 2.17 provides an interpretable algebraically closed
field L of characteristic zero such that U/D0 is definably isomorphic to L+ . This
contradicts the previous paragraph, so F (B) does not cover U/D0 , and (F (B) ∩
U )D0 /D0 is finite. But D0 contains Z(B) and F (B)/Z(B) is torsion-free, so F (B)
avoids U/D0 .
    Since B is a connected solvable algebraic group, B/F (B)◦ is abelian, and F (B)
is a maximal nilpotent subgroup of B, so F (B) is the intersection of the centralizers
of the B-minimal sections of B. Then we find finitely many B-minimal sections
R1 /S1 , . . . , Rn /Sn of B such that F (B) is the intersection of their centralizers in
B. Now, for each i = 1, . . . , n, either B centralizes Ri /Si , or B/CB (Ri /Si ) is
definably isomorphic to Ki∗ for an interpretable algebraically closed field Ki (Fact
2.5). Consequently, for each i = 1, . . . , n such that CB (Ri /Si ) does not cover U/D0 ,
there is a finite subgroup Fi /D0 of U/D0 such that U/Fi is definably isomorphic
to an infinite definable subgroup of Ki∗ . Morover, in Q, the fields Ki and Q are
definably isomorphic (Fact 2.6), so Ki∗ has Morley rank one (in Q). This implies
that U/Fi is definably isomorphic to Ki∗ .
    If i and j are two elements of {1, . . . , n} such that CB (Ri /Si ) and CB (Rj /Sj )
do not cover U/D0 , then U/Fi Fj is definably isomorphic to Ki∗ and Kj∗ , so Ki and
Kj are definably isomorphic (Lemma 5.4). Moreover, since F (B) avoids U/D0 , the
intersection of the subgroups Fi of this form is D0 . Thus, there is i ∈ {1, . . . , n} such
that U/D0 is definably isomorphic to a subgroup of (Ki∗ )n . By minimality of U/D0 ,
this implies that U/D0 is definably isomorphic to Ki∗ , contradicting that U/D0 is
definably isomorphic to no group of the form K ∗ for an infinite interpretable field
K. This finishes the proof. 

Corollary 9.3. – If G0 contains Z(G)◦ , then G = G∗ , otherwise G is abstractly
isomorphic to G∗ × Q+ .

   Proof – In the first case, Proposition 9.2 gives G0 = (G∗ )0 , so G∗ ≥ G0 contains
Z(G)◦ , and again Proposition 9.2 provides the result.
   In the second case, we note that, since the ground field of G is of characteristic
zero, there are finitely many elements of order n in Z(G) for each n ∈ N. Hence
Z(G∗ ) contains the torsion of Z(G). Moreover, since the ground field of G is
algebraically closed and of characteristic zero, Z(G)◦ is divisible, so Z(G∗ )◦ is
divisible too. Therefore Z(G∗ )◦ = G∗ ∩ Z(G)◦ has a complement D in Z(G)◦ , and
D is divisible and torsion-free since Z(G)◦ is divisible and since Z(G∗ ) contains
the torsion of Z(G). Now Proposition 9.2 gives G = G∗ × D. Since D is divisible
and torsion-free, it is a direct product of countably many copies of Q, and Q+ is
isomorphic to Q+ × D. But Z(G)◦ is not contained in G0 , hence Lemma 8.10 shows
that G is abstracly isomorphic to

                          G × Q+ ≃ G∗ × D × Q+ ≃ G∗ × Q+ ,

and the result follows.     
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                               71


Corollary 9.4. – Let H be another connected affine algebraic group over Q. If the
pure groups G and H are elementarily equivalent, then they are abstractly isomor-
phic.
   Proof – We assume that M = (G, · ,−1 , 1), and we consider the structure
N = (H, · ,−1 , 1). Let T be the theory of M and N . By [27, Theorem 4.2.20], there
is an elementary substructure M0 = (G0 , · ,−1 , 1) of M (resp. N0 = (H0 , · ,−1 , 1)
of N ), where M0 (resp. N0 ) is a prime model of T . Then M0 and N0 are isomorphic
by [27, Corollary 4.2.16]. Now Corollary 9.3 says that,
      • either G0 contains Z(G)◦ , therefore H 0 contains Z(H)◦ , and we have G =
         G0 ≃ H0 = H;
      • or G0 does not contain Z(G)◦ , therefore H 0 does not contain Z(H)◦ , and
         we have
                           G ≃ G∗ × Q+ ≃ H ∗ × Q+ ≃ H.
  
   From now on, we are ready for the proof of Theorem 1.1 and, simultaneously,
for the one of Theorem 1.6 in the affine case.
   Proof of Theorem 1.1 in the general case, and of Theorem 1.6 for
affine groups – Let K be an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero,
and let G be a connected affine algebraic Q-group. We consider an elementary
substructure K1 of the pure field K, with K1 isomorphic to Q. Let G1 be the
elementary substructure of G(K) in K1 . Then Lemma 8.10 and Theorem 8.14
provide the existence of a connected affine algebraic group D1 over K1 and of a
finite central subgroup F of D1 , such that the affine algebraic groups over K1
abstractly isomorphic to G1 are the following ones, up to isomorphism of algebraic
groups:
       • D1 /α1 (F ) if G01 contains Z(G1 )◦ ;
       • D1 /α1 (F ) × (K1 )s+ if Z(G1 )◦ is not contained in G01 ,
where α1 is a quasi-standard automorphism of D1 , and s is an integer. We may
assume that there is an integer s such that G1 and D1 /F × (K1 )s+ are isomorphic
as algebraic groups, and we may assume that D1 is constructed as D(G1 ) in §8.
We consider the elementary extension D(K) of D1 to K. We note that, since the
                                                                     s
extension of F to K is F , the groups G(K) and D(K)/F × K+             are isomorphic as
algebraic groups.
   Firstly, if G(K)0 contains Z(G(K))◦ , then for each quasi-standard automor-
phism α of D(K), the groups D(K)/F and D(K)/α(F ) are abstractly isomorphic.
Secondly, if Z(G(K))◦ is not contained in G(K)0 , we consider an integer r and a
                                                                                      r
quasi-standard automorphism α of D(K), and we show that D(K)/α(F ) × K+                 is
                                                       ◦                          0
abstractly isomorphic to G(K). Since Z(G(K)) is not contained in G(K) , then
Z(G1 )◦ is not contained in G01 , and the subgroup T1 of D1 , corresponding to T (G1 )
in §8, is either (K1 )+ , or (K1∗ )k for a positive integer k. Hence D(K) has an alge-
braic subgroup A such that we have either D(K) = A × K+ , or D = A × (K ∗ )k
for a positive integer k. Since K has characteristic zero, then for each integer l,
the groups K+ (resp. (K ∗ )k ) and K+ × K+        l
                                                     (resp. (K ∗ )k × K+
                                                                       l
                                                                         ) are abstractly
                                                                                        l
isomorphic. This implies that D(K)/F is abstractly isomorphic to D(K)/F × K+
                                                                                    r
for each integer l. In particular, the groups G(K), D(K)/F and D(K)/F × K+ are
abstractly isomorphic. Since D(K)/F and D(K)/α(F ) are abstractly isomorphic
                                                                                  r
too, we obtain the abstract isomorphy between G(K) and D(K)/α(F ) × K+              .
72                                         OLIVIER FRÉCON


    Now we consider a connected affine algebraic Q-group H, and we assume that the
pure groups G(K) and H(K) are elementarily equivalent. Let H1 be the elementary
substructure of H(K) in K1 . Then the pure groups G1 and H1 are elementarily
equivalent, and Corollary 9.4 shows that G1 and H1 are abstractly isomorphic.
Consequently, there exists a quasi-standard automorphism α1 of D1 such that:
      • either G01 contains Z(G1 )◦ , and H1 and D1 /α1 (F ) are isomorphic as alge-
         braic groups;
      • or G01 does not contain Z(G1 )◦ , and there is an integer r such that H1 and
         D1 /α1 (F ) × (K1 )r+ are isomorphic as algebraic groups.
Since α1 (F ) is finite, its extension to K is α1 (F ), and one of the following two
conditions is satisfied:
      • either Z(G(K))◦ ≤ G(K)0 , and H(K) and D(K)/α1 (F ) are isomorphic as
         algebraic groups;
      • or Z(G(K))◦ 6≤ G(K)0 , and H(K) and D(K)/α1 (F ) × K+                              r
                                                                                             are isomorphic
         as algebraic groups.
Moreover, since α1 is a quasi-standard automorphism of D1 , there is two decomposi-
tions D1 = R1∗ ×· · ·×Rn∗ and D1 = S1∗ ×· · ·×Sn∗ of D1 , where R1∗ , . . . , Rn∗ , S1∗ , . . . , Sn∗
are some algebraic subgroups of D1 such that α1 (Ri∗ ) = Si∗ for each i, and such
that the isomorphism α1i : Ri∗ → Si∗ induced by α1 is standard for each i. Thus,
for each i = 1, . . . , n, there is a field automorphism δi∗ of K1 and an isomorphism
µ∗i : Ri∗ → Si∗ of algebraic groups such that α1i = µ∗i ◦ δi∗ . Now we consider the
extensions R1 , . . . , Rn , S1 , . . . , Sn to K of R1∗ , . . . , Rn∗ , S1∗ , . . . , Sn∗ respectively, and
the ones µ1 , . . . , µn of µ∗1 , . . . , µ∗n respectively. Moreover, for each i, we consider an
extension δi to K of the automorphism δi∗ of K1 . Then, for each i, the isomor-
phism αi = µi ◦ δi from Ri to Si is standard, and it satisfies αi (x) = α1i (x) for
each x ∈ Ri∗ . Now the automorphism α of D(K) defined by α(x) = αi (x) for each
x ∈ Ri is quasi-standard, and it satisfies α(F ) = α1 (F ). Finally, H(K) has the
desired form. 

               10. Bi-interpretability and standard isomorphisms
    From Steinberg [34, Theorem 30 p.158], it is well-known that all the automor-
phisms of a simple algebraic group over a perfect field are standard. From our
work, we obtain an algebraic characterization of the algebraic groups over an alge-
braically closed field of positive characteristic all of whose abstract automorphisms
are standard (Theorem 10.1 below). This is the main result of this section.
    However, this characterisation does not work when the ground field is of charac-
teristic zero but not isomorphic to Q, since Examples 3.1 (1) and (3) yield counter-
examples. Then we provide a sufficient algebraic condition under which all the
abstract automorphisms of a connected algebraic group over an algebraically closed
field of characteristic zero are standard (Theorem 10.9).
    Furthermore, we find model-theoretical characterizations of the algebraic groups
all of whose abstract automorphisms are standard (Theorems 10.6 and 10.7).
    First we give our main result, where the meaning of the condition (1) is detailed
in Remark 10.2 below.
Theorem 10.1. – Let G be a nontrivial connected algebraic group over an alge-
braically closed field K, such that K has no nonzero derivations (i.e. either its
characteristic is positive, or K ≃ Q). Then the following conditions are equivalent:
                   ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                           73


     • any isomorphism α from G to another algebraic group over an algebraically
       closed field is standard;
     • any automorphism of G is standard;
     • (1) (Remark 10.2) there is no nonzero homomorphism from G to Z(G);
        (2) the group G is not central product of two proper closed subgroups U
            and V with U ∩ V finite.
   Proof – If G satisfies (1) and (2), we consider the ACF -expansion of the pure
group G. Then G is definably affine by (1) and Lemma 10.5, and G is definably
linear over one interpretable field by (2) and Proposition 5.11. In this case, Fact
3.6 shows that any isomorphism α from G to another algebraic group over an
algebraically closed field is standard. Moreover, this implies that any automorphism
of G is standard. Hence we may assume that any automorphism of G is standard,
and we have just to prove that G satisfies the conditions (1) and (2). Since this
follows from Lemmas 10.4 and 8.4, we obtain the result. 
Remark 10.2. – For the main results of this section, we are concerned by connected
algebraic groups G over an algebraically closed field K for which there is no nonzero
homomorphism from G to Z(G). If p denotes the characteristic of K, by [24, §19.5],
this means that,
      • either p > 0, the center Z(G) has no nontrivial torus, and either G/G0 is a
        torus (i.e. G is generated by its tori), or Z(G) has no nontrivial unipotent
        element;
      • or p = 0 and either G is perfect (i.e. G = G0 ), or Z(G) is finite.
10.1. Positive characteristic and bi-interpretability. In this part, we demon-
strate strong links between bi-interpretability and standard automorphisms, since
we characterize the groups all of whose abstract isomorphisms are standard by using
bi-interpretability (Theorems 10.6 and 10.7).
   At first, we show that we may build a nonstandard automorphism for some alge-
braic groups, in the same vein than Lemma 8.4 (Lemmas 10.3 and 10.4). Although
these results seem natural, it is not clear that there exists direct proofs.
Lemma 10.3. – Let G be a connected affine algebraic group over an algebraically
closed field K. If G0 does not contain Z(G)◦◦ , then G has a nonstandard automor-
phism α such that G = T × CG (α) for a subgroup T of Z(G)◦◦ .
   Proof – Let p be the characteristic of K. Let M be a maximal proper connected
closed subgroup of G containing G0 and not Z(G)◦◦ . Then there is a connected
closed subgroup A ≤ Z(G)◦◦ of dimension one over K such that G = AM , and
A ∩ M is finite. If A is radicable with torsion, let q be a prime integer with
q > p such that A has an element of order q, and such that q does not divide
|A ∩ M |. Let T be a subgroup of A satisfying T ≃ Z(q ∞ ), where Z(q ∞ ) denotes
                   n
{x ∈ C | ∃n ∈ N, xq = 1}. If A is radicable and torsion-free, let T be a subgroup
of A satisfying T ≃ Q+ . If A is not radicable, then p is a prime, A ≃ K+ has
exponent p, and we consider a subgroup T of order p2 in A satisfying T ∩ M = 1.
Then we have T ∩ M = 1, and by using [5, Fact 1.1] when A is radicable, we find
a subgroup H of G containing M such that H ∩ T = 1. Moreover, there is an
automorphism τ of T such that CT (τ ) = 1.
   Now we consider the automorphism α of G defined by α(ht) = hτ (t) for each
h ∈ H and each t ∈ T . Then we have G = T × CG (α). We assume toward a
74                                  OLIVIER FRÉCON


contradiction that α = β ◦ µ for µ a field automorphism of K, and β an isogeny.
Then we have µ(x) = β −1 (x) for each x ∈ M . Thus, if M is nontrivial, then µ is
constructible, so either it is trivial, or p is a prime and µ is a power of the Frobenius
automorphism. In particular, the condition M 6= 1 implies that α is constructible,
so H = CG (α) is definable, and G/H ≃ T is definable too. But this is impossible
since either T is radicable and isomorphic to Q+ or Z(q ∞ ), or |T | = p2 contradicting
that G is connected. Hence we have M = 1 and G = A.
    Thus we may assume that either A = K+ or A = K ∗ . Moreover, we may assume
that, if K0 denotes the prime subfield of K, then P := (K0 )+ is contained in H
in the first case, and P := K0∗ is contained in H in the second case. In particular,
for each x ∈ P , we have β(x) = α(x) = x. On the other hand, if p is a prime, we
denotes by K1 the subfield of K of order p3 , and we may assume that Q := K1∗
is contained in H when A = K ∗ . We show that α is a field automorphism. If
                                                                     n
A = K+ , there exists a ∈ K ∗ and n ∈ N such that β(x) = axp for each x ∈ A, so
              n
we have axp = x for each x ∈ P , and we obtain a = 1. Thus β and α are field
automorphisms. If A = K ∗ and if p = 0, then either β(x) = x for each x ∈ A, or
β(x) = x−1 for each x ∈ A. Since β(x) = x for each x ∈ P , we obtain β(x) = x
for each x ∈ A and α = µ is a field automorphism. If A = K ∗ and if p is a prime,
there exists s ∈ N such that, for r = ps or r = −ps , we have β(x) = xr for each
                                                                   s
x ∈ A. Since the map β ∗ : K → K defined by β ∗ (x) = xp for each x ∈ K is a
power of the Frobenius automorphism, by considering β ∗ ◦ µ instead of µ, we may
assume that, either β(x) = x for each x ∈ A, or β(x) = x−1 for each x ∈ A. In
the first case, α = µ is a field automorphism, so we may assume β(x) = x−1 for
each x ∈ A. Then, for each x ∈ Q, we have x−1 = β −1 (x) = β −1 ◦ α(x) = µ(x).
                                                                                      2
But either µ(x) = x for each x ∈ Q or µ(x) = xp for each x ∈ Q or µ(x) = xp for
                                         −1                             p      −1
each x ∈ Q, hence we have either x = x for each x ∈ Q, or x = x for each
               2
x ∈ Q, or xp = x−1 for each x ∈ Q. This contradicts that Q has an element of
        3
order p − 1, so α is a field automorphism.
    Now C := CK (α) is a subfield of K, and K is C-vector space of dimension ≥ 2.
If A = K+ , this implies that H imbeds in A/H ≃ T , so K+ imbeds in T × T . This
is impossible if p is a prime since T is finite, and this is impossible if p = 0 too
because, in this case, H is a direct product of infinitely many copies of Q+ and T
is isomorphic to Q+ . Thus we have A = K ∗ and T ≃ Z(q ∞ ) for a prime q > p. If p
is a prime, we consider the smallest finite subfield F of K with an element of order
q. Let pn be its order, let m ∈ N such that pm = |F ∩ C|, and let F1 be the subfield
of K of order p2n . In particular, q divides pn − 1, so q does not divide pn + 1 since
q > p ≥ 2. Moreover, q does not divide pm −1 by minimality of F . Let r ∈ N be the
largest integer such that q r divides pn − 1. Since A = T × H with H = CA (α), we
        n
                                                                          p2n −1
have ppm−1       r               r
          −1 = q , and F has q q-elements. Since q does not divide pn −1 = p + 1,
                                                                                    n
                                                      r
all the q-elements of F1 lies in F , and F1 has q -elements. Thus, if s is the integer
                                          2n
                                             −1
such that ps = |F1 ∩ C|, then q r = pps −1      , and since F ∩ C is a subfield of F1 ∩ C,
                                                        2n         n
there is k ∈ N such that s = km. This implies that ppkm−1 −1
                                                             = ppm−1
                                                                  −1 , hence we obtain
pn + 1 = p(k−1)m + p(k−2)m + · · · + 1, so we find k = 1 and n = m, contradicting the
choices of m and n. Finally, we have p = 0. In particular, K0∗ ≃ Q∗ has an element
of order 2, so C has a nontrivial 2-torus and an element i of order 4. On the other
hand, we
       √
           may assume q = 3, so H has no element of order 3. This contradicts that
− 12 + 23 i is an element of order 3 in H = C ∗ . 
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            75


Lemma 10.4. – Let G be a connected affine algebraic group over an algebraically
closed field K. If there is a nonzero homomorphism from G to Z(G), then G has a
nonstandard automorphism.
   Proof – We assume toward a contradiction that any automorphism of G is
standard. Then Lemma 10.3 shows that G0 contains Z(G)◦◦ , so Z(G) has no
nontrivial torus. First we suppose that K is of positive characteristic. Then G/G0
is not a torus and Z(G) has a nontrivial unipotent element. Since G0 contains
Z(G)◦◦ , we find a subgroup H of index p in G and containing G0 Z(G). Since Z(G)
has a nontrivial unipotent element, there is an homomorphism γ : G → Z(G) with
kernel H. Then the map α : G → G, defined by α(x) = xγ(x) for each x ∈ G,
is an automorphism of G. Therefore α is standard and we have α = β ◦ µ for
µ a field automorphism of K and β an isogeny. Since G0 contains Z(G)◦◦ , the
group G is not abelian and G0 is infinite. But we have α(x) = x for each x ∈ G0 ,
so µ is constructible. Hence α is constructible too, and H = CG (α) is definable,
contradicting that G is connected and that H is of index p in G. Thus we may
assume that K is of characteristic zero.
   From now on, G/G0 is nontrivial and Z(G) is infinite. Since G0 contains Z(G)◦◦ ,
the groups G/Z(G)G0 and Z(G) have subgroups P/Z(G)G0 ≃ Q+ and Q ≃ Q+
respectively. Now P/Z(G)G0 has a complement X/Z(G)G0 in G/Z(G)G0 [5, Fact
1.1], and there is an epimorphism γ from G to Q with kernel X. Let α be the
automorphism of G defined, for each x ∈ G, by α(x) = xγ(x). Therefore α is
standard and we have α = β ◦ µ for µ a field automorphism of K and β an isogeny.
Since G0 contains Z(G)◦◦ , the group G is not abelian and G0 is infinite. But we
have α(x) = x for each x ∈ G0 , so µ is constructible. Hence α is constructible too,
and X = CG (α) is definable. Now G/X ≃ Q+ is an abelian connected algebraic
group over K. This contradicts that, since K is algebraically closed, because any
infinite abelian algebraic group over K contains a copy of Q+ ⊕ Q+ . This finishes
the proof. 
  By Theorem 10.6, there is a strong link between biinterpretability and standard
automorphisms. Its proof uses the following lemma.
Lemma 10.5. – Let G be a nontrivial connected algebraic group over an alge-
braically closed field K. We assume that K has no nonzero derivations (i.e. either
its characteristic is positive, or K ≃ Q). If there is no nonzero homomorphism
from G to Z(G), then the ACF -expansion of the pure group G is definably affine.
   Furthermore, if the characteristic of K is positive, then the pure group G is
definably affine.
   Proof – If K ≃ Q, then either G is perfect or Z(G) is finite, so Theorems
5.16 and 7.13 imply that G is definably affine. Hence we may assume that the
characteristic of K is positive, and we have just to prove that the pure group G is
definably affine. If Z(G) has a nontrivial torus, then G/G0 has a nontrivial torus
[24, §19.5], contradicting our hypothesis over G. But S(G) is a connected subgroup
of a pseudo-tori of the pure group G, so S(G) is a radicable closed subgroup of
G and it is a tori. Hence, since S(G) is central in G, it is trivial. In particular,
this shows that, if G is generated by its tori, then G is definably affine (Proposition
7.3). Consequently, we may assume that Z(G) has no nontrivial unipotent element.
That is, Z(G) is finite and p does not divide its order. Then Proposition 7.14 says
that G is definably affine, finishing the proof. 
76                                OLIVIER FRÉCON


Theorem 10.6. – Let G be a nontrivial connected affine algebraic group over an
algebraically closed field K. Then the following conditions are equivalent:
      • the field K and the ACF -expansion of the pure group G are biinterpretable;
      • the algebraic group G and the ACF -expansion of the pure group G are
        biinterpretable;
      • the ACF -expansion of the pure group G is definably linear over one inter-
        pretable field;
      • any automorphism of G is standard.
   Proof – By Fact 2.6, to say that K and the ACF -expansion of the pure group
G are biinterpretable is equivalent to say that, in the ACF -expansion of the pure
group G, there an interpretable field L and a definable isomorphism α from G to an
algebraic group over L. That is, G is definably linear over one interpretable field or,
equivalently, the algebraic group G and the ACF -expansion of the pure group G
are biinterpretable. In particular, by Fact 3.6, this implies that any automorphism
of G is standard.
   Now we assume that any automorphism of G is standard, and we consider the
ACF -expansion of the pure group G. We show that G is definably linear over one
interpretable field. By Proposition 5.11 and Lemma 8.4, it is sufficient to prove that
G is definably affine. By Lemma 10.5, we may assume that K is of characteristic
zero. Since any automorphism of G is standard, the image of any closed subgroup
of G by any automorphism of G is a closed subgroup. Hence each closed subgroup
of G is definable. On the other hand, Lemma 10.4 show that either G is perfect
or Z(G) is finite. Let T be a maximal torus of G. It is definable, and we show
that it is definably affine. Indeed, let B be a Borel subgroup of G containing T ,
and let U be its unipotent radical. These subgroups are definable, and we have
B = U o T and Z(B) = Z(G) [24, §19.3 and §22.2]. If T ∩ Z(B) is infinite, then G0
is perfect, contradicting [24, §19.5]. Since each torus of F (B) is central in B, this
implies that T ∩ F (B) is finite. From now on, the intersection of the centralizers
of the B-minimal sections A of U is finite. But, for each B-minimal section A,
either it is centralized by T , or T /CT (A) is definably linear (Fact 2.5). Hence T
is definably affine (Theorem 5.16 and Lemma 5.17). Consequently, the (definable)
subgroup R generated by the tori of G is definably affine (Theorem 5.9). Thus, we
may assume that G is not perfect, that is Z(G) is finite. Let V be the unipotent
part of G. It is definable, generated by its closed subgroup of dimension one, and
satisfies G = V R. Moreover, each closed subgroup A of dimension one in V is
definable, radicable and with no nontrivial proper definable subgroup. By Lemma
7.6, either A ≃ ACG (R)/CG (R) is definably affine, or it centralizes R. In the second
case, since Z(G) is finite and since G = V R, we have A  Z(V ). In particular, A
is not a pseudo-torus (Fact 2.10 (iii)), so it is definably isomorphic to L+ for an
interpretable field L. Thus A is definably affine, and Theorem 5.9 says that V and
G = V R are definably affine too, as desired. 
  When the ground field is of positive characteristic, we have a similar result by
considering the pure group rather than the ACF -expansion of the pure group.
Theorem 10.7. – Let G be a nontrivial connected affine algebraic group over an
algebraically closed field K of positive characteristic. Then the following conditions
are equivalent:
      • the field K and the pure group G are biinterpretable;
                   ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            77


     • the algebraic group G and the pure group G are biinterpretable;
     • the pure group G is definably linear over one interpretable field;
     • any automorphism of G is standard.
    Proof – We prove the equivalence between the three first assertions as in the
proof of Theorem 10.6. Now, we consider the pure group G, and we show that, if any
automorphism of G is standard, then G is definably linear over one interpretable
field. We notice that Lemmas 10.4 and 8.4 say that,
     (1) there is no nonzero homomorphism from G to Z(G)
     (2) G is not a central product G = U · V of two proper closed subgroups U and
         V with U ∩ V finite.
In particular, by the second condition and Proposition 5.11, it is sufficient to prove
that G is definably affine. Hence the first condition and Lemma 10.5 yields the
result. 
Remark 10.8. – We notice that the previous result fails when the ground field is
of characteristic zero.
   Indeed, if we consider the field K = Q and
                                                        
                         t a u                            
                  G =  0 t v  | t ∈ K ∗ , (a, u, v) ∈ K 3 ,
                            0 0 1
                                                          

then all the automorphisms of G are standard by Lemma 3.10. However, the field
K and the pure group G are not bi-interpretable (see Example 3.1 (2)).
10.2. Characteristic zero. Unlike the positive characteristic, we fail to find in
zero characteristic an algebraic characterization of the algebraic groups all of whose
all the abstract automorphisms are standard. However, the main result of this
section provides algebraic conditions under which any automorphism of a connected
algebraic group, defined over an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero, is
standard.
Theorem 10.9. – Let G be a connected algebraic group over an algebraically closed
field K of characteristic zero. Then all of its automorphisms are standard if it
satisfies the following three conditions:
     (1) either G is perfect or Z(G) is finite;
     (2) G is not a central product of two proper closed subgroups U and V with
         U ∩ V finite;
     (3) for each characteristic abelian connected closed subgroup A of G, and each
         maximal torus T of G, the centralizer CA (T ) is central in G,
Furthermore, under these conditions, the algebraic group G and the pure group G
are biinterpretable.
  Its proof requires the following results.
Lemma 10.10. – Let G be a connected ACF0 -group. If G is perfect or if Z(G) is
finite, then F (G)◦ is a torsion-free U
                                      e -group.

  Proof – We fix an algebraically closed field K of characteristic zero interpreting
G, and we consider G as an algebraic group over K. Since either G is perfect or
Z(G) is finite, the algebraic group G is affine. Moreover, we note that F (G)◦ is
unipotent, otherwise the maximal torus T of F (G)◦ would be nontrivial, and since
78                                OLIVIER FRÉCON


G0 ∩ T is finite [24, §19.5], the center Z(G) would be finite by our hypothesis,
contradicting [24, Corollary 16.3]. This implies that F (G)◦ is torsion-free, and that
F (G)◦ is the unipotent radical of G.
   Let B be a Borel subgroup of G. In particular B contains F (G)◦ . Then
F (B)/Z(B) is a U  e -group by Fact 2.21, and since Z(B) = Z(G) by [24, Corol-
lary 22.2.B], the quotient F (G)◦ /(F (G)◦ ∩ Z(G)) is a U    e -group (Fact 2.19). In
particular, since F (G) is torsion-free, then if Z(G) is finite, the subgroup F (G)◦
                        ◦

is a U
     e -group. Hence we may assume that G is perfect.
   Let R be a maximal reductive subgroup of G. Then we have G = F (G)◦ o R,
so G0 = [F (G)◦ , G] o R0 , and since G is perfect, we find F (G)◦ = [F (G)◦ , G]. Now
Fact 2.22 says that F (G)◦ is a U e -group. 
Proposition 10.11. – Let G be a connected ACF0 -group, and let K be an alge-
braically closed field of characteristic zero interpreting G. We assume that either G
is perfect or Z(G) is finite. If the maximal tori of G, viewed as an algebraic group
over K, are definable in the ACF -group G, then G is definably affine.
    Proof – Let T be a maximal torus of the algebraic group G over K, and
let U = F (G)◦ . Then U is torsion-free by Lemma 10.10. In particular, it is a
unipotent subgroup of the algebraic group G, so T ∩ U is trivial. By Corollary
7.10, the quotient G/U is definably affine. Therefore T is definably affine, and the
subgroup T of G generated by the tori of G is definably affine too (Theorem 5.9).
Hence we may assume that T is proper in G. In particular, G is not perfect since
G/T is a unipotent group, so Z(G) is finite.
    Moreover G/CG (T ) is definably linear by Lemma 7.6, so G/CU (T ) is definably
affine by Lemma 5.17, and we may assume that CU (T ) is nontrivial. In particular,
since CU (T ) is a normal subgroup of the nilpotent group U , the group CZ(U ) (T ) is
nontrivial. But G/T is a unipotent group, so it is covered by the unipotent radical
of G, and since this one is contained in U = F (G)◦ , we find G = U T . Hence
CZ(U ) (T ) is central in G, contradicting that U is torsion-free and Z(G) is finite.

    Proof of Theorem 10.9 – We assume toward a contradiction that G is a
countexample to Theorem 10.9. By Fact 3.6, the pure group G is not definably
linear over an interpretable field. By (2) and Proposition 5.11, the pure group G
is not definably affine. Now G/Z(G) is not definably affine by (1), and by using
Theorem 5.16 if Z(G) and Lemma 7.12 if G is perfect.
    Let T0 be the torsion subgroup of a maximal torus T of G, and let D = d(T0 ) be
the definable hull of T0 in the pure group G. We note that T is the Zariski closure of
T0 , so D contains T , and since T0 ≤ T is abelian, D is abelian too. Moreover, since
G/Z(G) is not definably affine, we have T Z(G) < DZ(G) by Proposition 10.11.
    Let U = F (G)◦ . It is a torsion-free U e -group by Lemma 10.10, and G/U is
definably affine by Corollary 7.10. In particular, U is a unipotent group, and U
contains W (G) (Corollary 5.18). Since T W (G)/W (G) is definable by Corollary
5.12, then T W (G) = DW (G), and since T Z(G) < DZ(G), the intersection D ∩
W (G) is noncentral in G.
    Let E/(D ∩Z(G)∩W (G)) be a D-minimal subgroup of (D ∩W (G))/(D ∩Z(G)∩
W (G)). Since U is a U  e -group, E/(D ∩ Z(G) ∩ W (G)) is definably isomorphic to
L+ for an algebraically closed field L. If T1 is a maximal radicable abelian torsion
subgroup of G, then T1 is formed by semisimple elements, and its Zariski closure
                    ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                            79


T1 is a torus. Actually, by maximality of T1 , the torus T1 is maximal, and T1 is a
the torsion subgroup of T1 . Hence T1 is conjugate with T0 , so d(T1 ) is conjugate
with D as well, and since Z(G) ∩ W (G) is a characteristic in G, we conclude that
D ∩ Z(G) ∩ W (G) is a characteristic subgroup of G. Let A be the subgroup of
W (G) generated by all the images of E by the automorphisms of the pure group
G. Since E is definable and connected in the pure group G, then A is definable and
connected in the pure group G too by the Zil’ber Indecomposability Theorem ([28,
Theorem 2.9] or [5, Theorem 5.26]). Moreover, A is a characteristic subgroup of G,
and A/(D ∩ Z(G) ∩ W (G)) is definably affine over L by Theorem 5.9. Consequently
W (G) centralizes A/(D ∩Z(G)∩W (G)) (Lemma 7.6), and A/(D ∩Z(G)∩W (G)) is
abelian. At this stage, if Z(G) is finite, then D ∩ Z(G) ∩ W (G) is a finite subgroup
of the torsion-free subgroup U , so A is abelian and CA (T ) is central in G by (3),
contradicting that E ≤ D ≤ CA (T ) is noncentral in G. Thus by (1), the group G
is perfect.
   Since A = A/(D ∩ Z(G) ∩ W (G)) is definably affine over L, it is definably
linear over L (Theorem 5.16), and since it is torsion free and abelian, it is defin-
ably isomorphic isomorphic to an L-vector space. Then we find vector subspaces
A1 , . . . , Ak of A of dimension one normalized by T and such that A is the direct
sum of A1 , . . . , Ak . Since A is definably linear over L, these vector subspaces are
definable. Moreover, since W (G) centralizes A and since T W (G) = DW (G), they
are normalized by D as well. If T centralizes each subspace Ai , then T central-
izes A, and since T is a torus and A ≤ U is unipotent, the torus T centralizes A.
But G is perfect, so it is generated by its maximal tori, which are conjugate in
G, so G centralizes A, contradicting E  Z(G). Hence T does not centralizes all
the subpaces Ai . For each i, we denote by Ai the preimage of Ai in A. We fix
j ∈ {1, . . . , k} such that T does not centralizes Aj . Since Aj ≤ U is torsion-free,
and since the dimension of Aj /Z(Aj ) is at most one, then Aj is abelian. Now,
since D is abelian, the group Aj D is solvable of class two. But the codimension of
D in Aj D is one since the dimension of Aj = Aj /(D ∩ Z(G) ∩ W (G)) is one, so
since D does not centralizes Aj , it is a Carter subgroup of Aj D. By Fact 6.1 (iν),
we find a definable connected characteristic abelian subgroup Bj of Aj D such that
Aj D = Bj o D. Since D covers Aj D/(Aj D)0 (Fact 6.1 (iii)), the subgroup Bj is
contained in (Aj D)0 ≤ Aj and it is torsion-free. Moreover, since the codimension
of D in Aj D is one, the Zariski dimension of Bj is one, and since D does not cover
Aj , the subgroup Bj covers Aj . This implies that Bj is definably isomorphic to
L+ ≤ Aj . Now, if B denotes the largest connected subgroup of A definably linear
over L (Theorem 5.9), then B covers Aj , and B is central in A ≤ W (G) (Lemma
7.6). In particular, B is a characteristic abelian connected closed subgroup of G,
and by (3), the centralizer CB (T ) is central in G, so B does not contain E.
   By the choice of B, the torus T centralizes all the section Ai not covered by
B, so T centralizes A/B. Hence, since G is generated by its maximal tori, the
section A/B is centralized by G, and G normalizes (D ∩ A)B ≥ EB > B. Since
the maximal radicable abelian torsion subgroups of G are conjugates, and since T0
is one of them with D = d(T0 ), then the subgroup (D ∩ A)B is characteristic in G,
and since it contains E, we find A = (D ∩ A)B. Thus, since B is central in A and
since D is abelian, the group A is abelian, and we have our final contradiction with
(3) since CA (T ) contains E. 
80                                      OLIVIER FRÉCON


                                    Acknowledgements
   I would like to thank Tuna Altınel for his valuable comments that contributed
to improve this article, and his encouragement.


                                          References
 [1] Tuna Altınel, Alexandre V. Borovik, and Gregory Cherlin. Simple groups of finite Morley
     rank, volume 145 of Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society,
     Providence, RI, 2008.
 [2] Christine Altseimer and Ayşe Berkman. On quasi- and pseudounipotent groups of finite
     morley rank. Preprint.
 [3] Andreas Baudisch, Martin Hils, Amador Martin-Pizarro, and Frank O. Wagner. Die böse
     Farbe. J. Inst. Math. Jussieu, 8(3):415–443, 2009.
 [4] Armand Borel and Jacques Tits. Homomorphismes “abstraits” de groupes algébriques sim-
     ples. Ann. of Math. (2), 97:499–571, 1973.
 [5] Alexandre Borovik and Ali Nesin. Groups of finite Morley rank, volume 26 of Oxford Logic
     Guides. The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, New York, 1994. Oxford Science
     Publications.
 [6] E. I. Bunina. Elementary equivalence of Chevalley groups. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk,
     56(1(337)):157–158, 2001.
 [7] E. I. Bunina. Elementary equivalence of Chevalley groups over fields. Fundam. Prikl. Mat.,
     12(8):29–77, 2006.
 [8] E. I. Bunina. Elementary equivalence of Chevalley groups over local rings. Mat. Sb., 201(3):3–
     20, 2010.
 [9] E. I. Bunina and A. V. Mikhalev. Elementary properties of linear and algebraic groups. J.
     Math. Sci. (New York), 110(3):2595–2659, 2002. Algebra, 18.
[10] Jeffrey Burdges. A signalizer functor theorem for groups of finite Morley rank. J. Algebra,
     274(1):215–229, 2004.
[11] Jeffrey Burdges. Sylow theory for p = 0 in solvable groups of finite Morley rank. J. Group
     Theory, 9(4):467–481, 2006.
[12] Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace. “Abstract” homomorphisms of split Kac-Moody groups. Mem.
     Amer. Math. Soc., 198(924):xvi+84, 2009.
[13] Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Bernhard Mühlherr. Isomorphisms of Kac-Moody groups.
     Invent. Math., 161(2):361–388, 2005.
[14] Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Bernhard Mühlherr. Isomorphisms of Kac-Moody groups
     which preserve bounded subgroups. Adv. Math., 206(1):250–278, 2006.
[15] Gregory Cherlin. Good tori in groups of finite Morley rank. J. Group Theory, 8(5):613–621,
     2005.
[16] Kathryn Enochs and Ali Nesin. On 2-step solvable groups of finite Morley rank. Proc. Amer.
     Math. Soc., 110(2):479–489, 1990.
[17] Olivier Frécon. Around unipotence in groups of finite Morley rank. J. Group Theory, 9(3):341–
     359, 2006.
[18] Olivier Frécon. Conjugacy of carter subgroups in groups of finite morley rank. J. Math. Logic,
     8(1):41–92, 2008.
[19] Olivier Frécon. Groupes géométriques de rang de Morley fini. J. Inst. Math. Jussieu, 7(4):751–
     792, 2008.
[20] Olivier Frécon. Pseudo-tori and subtame groups of finite Morley rank. J. Group Theory,
     12(2):305–315, 2009.
[21] Olivier Frécon and Eric Jaligot. Conjugacy in groups of finite Morley rank. In Model theory
     with applications to algebra and analysis. Vol. 2, volume 350 of London Math. Soc. Lecture
     Note Ser., pages 1–58. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2008.
[22] G. Hochschild and G. D. Mostow. Automorphisms of affine algebraic groups. J. Algebra,
     13:535–543, 1969.
[23] Ehud Hrushovski and Boris Zilber. Zariski geometries. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 9(1):1–56, 1996.
[24] James E. Humphreys. Linear algebraic groups. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1975. Graduate
     Texts in Mathematics, No. 21.
                      ALGEBRAIC Q-GROUPS AS ABSTRACT GROUPS                                     81


[25] L. Lifschitz and A. Rapinchuk. On abstract homomorphisms of Chevalley groups with nonre-
     ductive image. I. J. Algebra, 242(1):374–399, 2001.
[26] A. I. Mal0 cev. The elementary properties of linear groups. In Certain Problems in Mathemat-
     ics and Mechanics (In Honor of M. A. Lavrent0 ev) (Russian), pages 110–132. Izdat. Sibirsk.
     Otdel. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Novosibirsk, 1961.
[27] David Marker. Model theory, volume 217 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag,
     New York, 2002. An introduction.
[28] B. Poizat. Groupes stables. Bruno Poizat, Lyon, 1987.
[29] K. N. Ponomarëv. Abstract isomorphisms of quasiminimal groups. Algebra i Logika,
     35(5):567–586, 625, 1996.
[30] E. D. Rabinovich. Definability of a field in sufficiently rich incidence systems, volume 14 of
     QMW Maths Notes. Queen Mary and Westfield College School of Mathematical Sciences,
     London, 1993. With an introduction by Wilfrid Hodges.
[31] Maxwell Rosenlicht. Some basic theorems on algebraic groups. Amer. J. Math., 78:401–443,
     1956.
[32] Gary M. Seitz. Abstract homomorphisms of algebraic groups. J. London Math. Soc. (2),
     56(1):104–124, 1997.
[33] A. A. Sharomet. Abstract isomorphisms of solvable algebraic groups. Vestnik Beloruss. Gos.
     Univ. Ser. I, (1):63–65, 1984.
[34] Robert Steinberg. Lectures on Chevalley groups. Yale University, New Haven, Conn., 1968.
     Notes prepared by John Faulkner and Robert Wilson.
[35] Robert Steinberg. Abstract homomorphisms of simple algebraic groups (after A. Borel and
     J. Tits). In Séminaire Bourbaki, 25ème année (1972/1973), Exp. No. 435, pages 307–326.
     Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 383. Springer, Berlin, 1974.
[36] J. Tits. Homorphismes “abstraits” de groupes de Lie. In Symposia Mathematica, Vol. XIII
     (Convegno di Gruppi e loro Rappresentazioni, INDAM, Rome, 1972), pages 479–499. Aca-
     demic Press, London, 1974.
[37] B. I. Zil0 ber. Some model theory of simple algebraic groups over algebraically closed fields.
     Colloq. Math., 48(2):173–180, 1984.

  Laboratoire de Mathématiques et Applications,
UMR 7348 du CNRS, Université de Poitiers, Téléport 2 - BP 30179, Bd Marie et Pierre
Curie, 86962 Futuroscope Chasseneuil Cedex, France
  E-mail address: olivier.frecon@math.univ-poitiers.fr
