Algebra and Logic, Vol. 52, No. 6, January, 2014
(Russian Original Vol. 52, No. 6, November-December, 2013)




                                      COMMUNICATIONS



LOCALLY INDICABLE GROUPS
OF FINITE MAL’TSEV RANK
    V. M. Kopytov                                                                        UDC 512.54

                 Presented by N. S. Romanovskii, a member of the Editorial Board

    Recall that G is called a group of ﬁnite Mal’tsev rank r if every ﬁnitely generated subgroup of
G is a group with r generators and r is the least number with this property. Below by the word
‘rank’ we mean the Mal’tsev rank. The notation and terminology adopted here are borrowed from
[1, 2].
    It is well known that the class of groups of ﬁnite rank is closed under subgroups, homomorphic
images, and direct products of ﬁnitely many groups. For torsion-free Abelian groups, the standard
concept of the rank of an Abelian group coincides with that of the Mal’tsev rank. We are also well
aware that every torsion-free locally nilpotent group of ﬁnite rank is nilpotent and its nilpotency
class does not exceed its rank. Groups of ﬁnite rank with additional restrictions were studied by
many mathematicians such as S. N. Chernikov, V. S. Charin, and D. I. Zaitsev.
    Research on groups of ﬁnite rank was reduced, as a rule, to imposing on a group conditions close
to solvability. An impetus for writing this paper is the question whether every linearly orderable
ﬁnitely generated group will be solvable. The structure of solvable matrix groups over Q is well
known. By a theorem of A. I. Mal’tsev, these are ﬁnite extensions of triangular matrix groups over
Q. We know that every torsion-free solvable group of ﬁnite rank can be represented by matrices
over the ﬁeld of rational numbers [1]. Note also that if the rank of a torsion-free solvable matrix
group over Q is ﬁnite then it is equal to the rational rank (D. I. Zaitsev).
    In looking into the above question in detail, it became clear that its resolution reduces to
treating a similar question for a wider class of groups, namely, the class of locally indicable groups.
Recall that a group G is said to be locally indicable if every nontrivial ﬁnitely generated subgroup
of G admits a homomorphism onto an inﬁnite cyclic group. This class of groups has interesting
group-theoretic properties. In [3], it was proved that every one-relator group having no elements
of ﬁnite order is locally indicable.
Morskoi pr., 64-2, Novosibirsk, 630090 Russia; kopytov@academ.org. Translated from Algebra i Logika,
Vol. 52, No. 6, pp. 769-771, November-December, 2013. Original article submitted December 30, 2013.

           0002-5232/14/5205-0511 c 2014 Springer Science+Business Media New York                 511
    The class of locally indicable groups is closely connected with right orderable groups. In 1972
R. Burns and V. Hale proved that the class of locally indicable groups coincides with a class of
groups admitting a right order under which the system of all convex subgroups of a group is a
complete solvable system of subgroups (such groups are referred to as Conradian); see [1]. A well-
known description of the structure of linearly orderable groups due to Mal’tsev implies that every
linearly orderable group is Conradian. Also there is a close relationship between the class of linearly
orderable groups and a wider class of Smirnov groups, i.e., right orderable groups whose systems
of convex subgroups are solvable and infrainvariant [4].
    An answer to the above question is the following:
    THEOREM 1. Every ﬁnitely generated locally indicable group of ﬁnite rank is solvable.
    An argument will be technically simpler if we consider a free group F = F (x, y) with free basis
x, y together an automorphism group Δ generated by standard automorphisms such as

                  τ : x → x−1 , y → y, σ : x → x, y → y −1 , ζ : x → y, y → x

(a dihedral group of order 8), and if a two-generated group G is treated as a factor group F/V ,
where V Δ = V . Such groups are said to be symmetrically deﬁned.
    The proof of the result mentioned reduces to examining two-generated locally indicable groups.
In so doing, use is made of a reﬁned version of the well-known theorem of B. Neumann on embedding
ﬁnitely generated orderable groups in two-generated orderable groups (see [1]).
    THEOREM 2. Every ﬁnitely generated right orderable group G is embedded in a two-
generated right orderable group G∗ . If G is Conradian, then G∗ is also Conradian. If G has ﬁnite
rank, then G∗ has ﬁnite rank as well. If G is solvable of derived length s, then G∗ likewise is solvable
of derived length s + 1. If G is deﬁned symmetrically and has ﬁnite rank, then G∗ , too, is deﬁned
symmetrically and has ﬁnite rank.


                                          REFERENCES

  1. V. M. Kopytov, Lattice-Ordered Groups [in Russian], Nauka, Moscow (1984).
  2. M. I. Kargapolov and Yu. I. Merzlyakov, Fundamentals of Group Theory [in Russian], 2nd
     edn., Nauka, Moscow (1977).
  3. S. D. Brodskii, “Equations over groups and one-relator groups,” Sib. Mat. Zh., 25, No. 2,
     84-103 (1984).
  4. D. M. Smirnov, “Right-ordered groups,” Algebra Logika, 5, No. 6, 41-59 (1966).




512
