            JOURNAL OF THE
            AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY
            Volume 31, Number 2, April 2018, Pages 319–347
            http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/jams/886
            Article electronically published on October 19, 2017



                           MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL

                                               PIOTR PRZYTYCKI AND DANIEL T. WISE



                                                                 1. Introduction
               A compact connected oriented irreducible 3-manifold with arbitrary, possibly
            empty boundary is mixed if it is not hyperbolic and not a graph manifold. A group
            is special if it is a subgroup of a right-angled Artin group. Our main result is the
            following.
            Theorem 1.1. Let M be a mixed 3-manifold. Then π1 M is virtually special.
            Corollary 1.2. The fundamental group of a mixed 3-manifold is linear over Z.
                 As explained below, Theorem 1.1 has the following consequence.
            Corollary 1.3. A mixed 3-manifold with possibly empty toroidal boundary virtually
            ﬁbers.
               An alternative deﬁnition of a special group is the following. A nonpositively
            curved cube complex X is special if its immersed hyperplanes do not self-intersect,
            are two-sided, do not directly self-osculate or interosculate (see Deﬁnition 6.1). A
            group G is (compact) special if it is the fundamental group of a (compact) special
            cube complex X. Then G is a subgroup of a possibly inﬁnitely generated right-
            angled Artin group [HW08, Thm 4.2]. Conversely, a subgroup G of a right-angled
            Artin group is the fundamental group of the corresponding cover X of the Salvetti
            complex, which is special. Note that if the fundamental group G of a special cube
            complex X is ﬁnitely generated, then a minimal locally convex subcomplex X  ⊂ X
            containing a π1 -surjective ﬁnite graph in X 1 has ﬁnitely many hyperplanes and is
            special so that G embeds in a ﬁnitely generated right-angled Artin group.
               Special groups are residually ﬁnite. Moreover, assuming that X has ﬁnitely
            many hyperplanes, the stabilizer in G of any hyperplane in the universal cover
            X of X is separable (see Corollary 6.8). For 3-manifold groups, separability of a
            subgroup corresponding to an immersed incompressible surface implies that in some
            ﬁnite cover of the manifold the surface lifts to an embedding. There are immersed
            incompressible surfaces in graph manifolds that do not lift to embeddings in a ﬁnite
            cover [RW98].

                Received by the editors June 6, 2012 and, in revised form, July 24, 2013, May 14, 2014, and
            May 12, 2017.
                2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 20F65, 57M50.
                The ﬁrst author was partially supported by MNiSW grant N201 012 32/0718, the Foundation
            for Polish Science, National Science Centre DEC-2012/06/A/ST1/00259 and UMO-2015/18/M/-
            ST1/00050, NSERC and FRQNT.
                The second author was supported by NSERC.

                                                                                                    2017
                                                                                                    c     American Mathematical Society

                                                                              319


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            320                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


               There are a variety of groups with the property that every ﬁnitely generated
            subgroup is separable; for instance, this was shown for free groups by M. Hall and
            for surface groups by Scott. A compact 3-manifold is hyperbolic if its interior is
            homeomorphic to a quotient of H3 (equivalently to the quotient of the interior of
            the convex hull of the limit set) by a geometrically ﬁnite Kleinian group. It was
            recently proved that hyperbolic 3-manifolds with an embedded geometrically ﬁnite
            incompressible surface have fundamental groups that are virtually compact spe-
            cial [Wis17, Thm 16.1 and 16.28]. This implies separability for all geometrically
            ﬁnite subgroups [Wis17, Thm 15.9]. By the Tameness [Ago04, CG06] and Covering
            [Thu80, Can96] Theorems all other ﬁnitely generated subgroups correspond to vir-
            tual ﬁbers, and hence they are separable as well. Very recently, Agol, Groves, and
            Manning [Ago13, Thm 1.1] building on [Wis17] proved that the fundamental group
            of every closed hyperbolic 3-manifold is virtually compact special and hence all its
            ﬁnitely generated subgroups are separable. For more details, see the survey article
            [AFW15].
               Another striking consequence of virtual specialness is virtual ﬁbering. Since
            special groups are subgroups of right-angled Artin groups, they are subgroups of
            right-angled Coxeter groups as well [HW99, DJ00]. Agol proved that such groups
            are virtually residually ﬁnite rationally solvable (RFRS) [Ago08, Thm 2.2]. Then he
            proved that if the fundamental group of a compact connected oriented irreducible
            3-manifold with toroidal boundary is RFRS, then it virtually ﬁbers [Ago08, Thm
            5.1]. In view of these results, every hyperbolic manifold with toroidal boundary
            virtually ﬁbers [Ago13, Thm 9.2]. Similarly, our Theorem 1.1 yields Corollary 1.3.
               Liu proved that an aspherical graph manifold has virtually special fundamental
            group if and only if it admits a nonpositively curved Riemannian metric [Liu13, Thm
            1.1]. Independently and with an eye toward the results presented here, we proved
            virtual specialness for graph manifolds with nonempty boundary [PW14, Cor 1.3].
            Note that graph manifolds with nonempty boundary carry a nonpositively curved
            metric by [Lee95, Thm 3.2]. Our Theorem 1.1 thus resolves the question of virtual
            specialness for arbitrary compact 3-manifold groups.

            Corollary 1.4. A compact aspherical 3-manifold has virtually special fundamental
            group if and only if it admits a Riemannian metric of nonpositive curvature.

               Corollary 1.4 was conjectured by Liu [Liu13, Conj 1.3]. As discussed above, he
            proved the conjecture for graph manifolds while for hyperbolic manifolds this follows
            from [Wis17] and [Ago13]. All mixed manifolds admit a metric of nonpositive
            curvature, essentially due to [Lee95, Thm 3.3], as shown in [Bri01, Thm 4.3]. Hence
            Theorem 1.1 resolves Liu’s conjecture in the remaining mixed case. However, the
            equivalence in Corollary 1.4 appears to be more circumstantial than a consequence
            of an intrinsic relationship between nonpositive curvature and virtual specialness:
            all manifolds in question except for certain particular closed graph manifolds have
            both of these features.
               As a consequence of virtual specialness of mixed manifolds (Theorem 1.1), hyper-
            bolic manifolds with nonempty boundary [Wis17, Thm 16.28] and graph manifolds
            with nonempty boundary [PW14, Cor 1.3], we have the following.

            Corollary 1.5. The fundamental group of any knot complement in S 3 has a faithful
            representation in SL(n, Z) for some n.


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          321


              Note that existence of a nonabelian representation of any nontrivial knot comple-
            ment group into SU(2) is a well-known result of Kronheimer and Mrowka [KM04].

            Organization. As explained in Section 2, the proof of Theorem 1.1 is divided into
            two steps. The ﬁrst step is Theorem 2.1 (Cubulation), which roughly states that
            in any mixed manifold there is a collection of surfaces suﬃcient for cubulation. In
            Section 3 we review the construction of surfaces in graph manifolds with boundary.
            We discuss surfaces in hyperbolic manifolds with boundary in Section 4. We prove
            Theorem 2.1 in Section 5 by combining the surfaces from graph manifold blocks
            and hyperbolic blocks.
               The second step is Theorem 2.4 (Specialization), which provides the virtual spe-
            cialness of the nonpositively curved cube complex produced in the ﬁrst step. In
            Section 6 we extend some separability results for special cube complexes to the non-
            compact setting. We apply them in Section 7 to obtain cubical small cancellation
            results for noncompact special cube complexes. This allows us to prove Theorem 2.4
            in Section 8.

            Ingredients in the proof of Theorem 1.1.
                     • Canonical completion and retraction (Theorem 6.3) for special cube com-
                       plexes [HW10].
                     • Criterion 2.3 for virtual specialness [HW10].
                     • Gitik–Minasyan double quasiconvex coset separability [Min06].
                     • Criterion for relative quasiconvexity [BW13].
                     • Combination Theorem 4.8 for relatively quasiconvex groups [MP09].
                     • Relative cocompactness of cubulations of relatively hyperbolic groups
                       [HW14].
                     • Criterion 4.3 for WallNbd-WallNbd Separation [HW14].
                     • Proposition 3.1 which constructs virtually embedded surfaces in graph man-
                       ifolds with boundary [PW14].
                     • Separability and double coset separability of embedded surfaces in graph
                       manifolds [PW14].
                     • Special Quotient Theorem 4.7 for groups hyperbolic relative to free-abelian
                       subgroups [Wis17].
                     • Theorem 2.6 on virtual specialness of hyperbolic manifolds with nonempty
                       boundary [Wis17].
                     • Main Theorem 7.1 of cubical small cancellation [Wis17].

                                            2. Technical reduction to two steps
               Let M be a compact connected oriented irreducible 3-manifold. By passing to a
            double cover, we can also assume that M has no π1 -injective Klein bottles. More-
            over, assume that M is not a Sol or Nil manifold. Up to isotopy, M then has
            a unique minimal collection of incompressible tori not parallel to ∂M , called JSJ
            tori, such that the complementary components called blocks are either algebraically
            atoroidal or else Seifert ﬁbered [Bon02, Thm 3.4]. We say that M is mixed if it
            has at least one JSJ torus and one atoroidal block. (Equivalently, by Perelman’s
            geometrization, M is not hyperbolic and not a graph manifold.) By Thurston’s
            hyperbolization all atoroidal blocks are hyperbolic, and we will denote them by
            Mkh . The JSJ tori adjacent to at least one hyperbolic block are transitional. The


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            322                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


            complementary components of the union of the hyperbolic blocks are graph mani-
            folds with boundary and will be called graph manifold blocks and denoted by Mig .
            Up to a diﬀeomorphism isotopic to the identity, each of their Seifert ﬁbered blocks
            admits a unique Seifert ﬁbration that we ﬁx. If a transitional torus is adjacent on
            both of its sides to hyperbolic blocks, we replace it by two parallel tori (also called
            JSJ, and transitional) and add the product region T × I bounded by them as a
            graph manifold block to the family {Mig }. Similarly, for a boundary torus of M
            adjacent to a hyperbolic block, we introduce its parallel copy in M (called JSJ, and
            transitional) and add the product region to {Mig }. These Mig = T × I will be called
            thin. We will later ﬁx one of many Seifert ﬁbrations on thin Mig .
                Unless stated otherwise, all surfaces are embedded or immersed properly. Let
            S → M be an immersed surface in a 3-manifold. Let M        → M be a covering map.
                          
            A map S → M that covers S → M and does not factor through another such map
            is its elevation (it is a lift when S = S). A connected oriented surface S → M that
            is not a sphere is immersed incompressible if it is π1 -injective and its elevation to
            the universal cover M   of M is an embedding. The surface S is virtually embedded
            if there is a ﬁnite cover M   of M with an embedded elevation of S. Given a block
            B and an immersed surface φ : S → M , a piece of S in B is the restriction of φ to
            a component of φ−1 (B) in S.
                The elevations of JSJ tori, boundary tori, and transitional tori of M to the
            universal cover M  are called JSJ planes, boundary planes, and transitional planes,
            respectively, and we keep the term blocks (hyperbolic, graph manifold, or Seifert
            ﬁbered ) for the elevations of blocks of M . We warn that this terminology refers to
            graph manifold blocks in M      even though they are not compact. Having speciﬁed
            a block Mo of M and a surface So ⊂ M
                                                     o , we denote by T(So ) the set of JSJ and
            boundary planes in ∂ M   o intersecting So .
                An axis for an element g ∈ π1 M acting on M   is a copy of R in M on which g acts
            by nontrivial translation. A cut-surface for g ∈ π1 M is an immersed incompressible
            surface S → M covered by S ⊂ M         such that there is an axis R for g satisfying
            
            S ∩ R = {0}, where the intersection is transverse.
            Theorem 2.1 (Cubulation). Let M be a mixed 3-manifold. There is a ﬁnite family
            of immersed incompressible surfaces S in M , in general position, and such that:
                (1) For each element of π1 M there is a cut-surface in S.
                (2) All JSJ tori belong to S.
                (3) Each piece of S in Mig is virtually embedded in Mig for each S ∈ S.
                (4) Each piece of S in Mkh is geometrically ﬁnite for each S ∈ S.
                (5) The family S satisﬁes the following Strong Separation property.
               To make sense of the term “suﬃciently far” in what follows, we ﬁx a Riemannian
            metric on M and lift it to the universal cover M. Note, however, that satisfying
            Strong Separation does not depend on the choice of this metric.
            Deﬁnition 2.2. A family S of surfaces in M satisﬁes the Strong Separation prop-
            erty if the following hold for the family 
                                                      S of elevations to M of the surfaces in S.
                (a) For any S,  S ∈ 
                                   
                                       S intersecting a block M  covering M h , if S ∩ M
                                                                  h                        h and
                                                                  k             k            k
                          h are suﬃciently far and T(S ∩ M
                     S ∩ M k
                                                             h ) ∩ T(S ∩ M
                                                               k
                                                                           h ) = ∅, then a surface
                                                                            k
                     from                      
                           S separates S from S.


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          323


                             S ∈ 
               (b) For any S,       S intersecting a block Mg covering M g , if S ∩ M
                                                                                       g and
                                                              i            i            i
                        g are suﬃciently far, then a surface from 
                   S ∩ M                                          S separates S from S.
                                                                                         
                          i
            We will appeal to parts (a) and (b) above as Strong Separation (a) and Strong
            Separation (b).
               We consider the dual CAT(0) cube complex X      associated to S by Sageev’s con-
                                       
            struction. Each S ∈ S cuts M into two closed halfspaces U, V, and the collection of
            pairs {U, V } endows M  with a Haglund–Paulin wallspace structure (we follow the
            treatment of these ideas in [HW14, §2.1] where U ∩ V is allowed to be nonempty).
            The group G = π1 M acting on M       preserves this structure, and hence it acts on
            the associated dual CAT(0) cube complex X.     The stabilizer in G of a hyperplane
                
            in X coincides with a conjugate of π1 S for an appropriate S ∈ S by general posi-
            tion. Note that if there is a cut-surface S ∈ S for g ∈ G, then g acts freely on X   
            [Wis12, Lem 7.16].
               If a group G acting freely on a CAT(0) cube complex X         has a ﬁnite index
                                                                                             is
            subgroup G such that G \X is special, then we say that the action of G on X
            virtually special. This coincides with the deﬁnition used in [HW10] by the freeness
            of the action and [HW10, Thm 3.5 and Rem 3.6]. We prove Theorem 1.1 using
            the following criterion for virtual specialness. Disjoint hyperplanes osculate if they
            have dual edges sharing an endpoint.
            Criterion 2.3. Let G act freely on a CAT(0) cube complex X.  Suppose that:
                                                                     
               (1) there are ﬁnitely many G orbits of hyperplanes in X;
                                             
               (2) for each hyperplane A ⊂ X, there are ﬁnitely many Stab(A)  orbits of hy-
                                            
                   perplanes that intersect A;
               (3) for each hyperplane A  ⊂ X,
                                               there are ﬁnitely many Stab(A)
                                                                              orbits of hy-
                                                
                   perplanes that osculate with A;
               (4) for each hyperplane A ⊂ X,
                                              the subgroup Stab(A) ⊂ G is separable; and
                                                                 
               (5) for each pair of intersecting hyperplanes A, B ⊂ X,    the double coset
                                
                   Stab(A)Stab(B) ⊂ G is separable.
                                     is virtually special.
            Then the action of G on X
               Criterion 2.3 follows directly from [HW10, Thm 4.1], since in Conditions (4) and
            (5) we require Stab(A) and Stab(A)Stab(
                                                        to be closed in the proﬁnite topology on
                                                       B)
            G and not only to have closures disjoint from certain speciﬁed sets as was required
            in [HW10, Thm 4.1].
               For each Mig we choose one conjugate Pi of π1 Mig in G = π1 M . Then G is
            hyperbolic relative to {Pi } (see, e.g., [BW13]) and we can discuss quasiconvexity
            of its subgroups relative to {Pi } (see, e.g., [BW13, Def 2.1]). For each S ∈ S,
            Theorem 2.1(4) implies that π1 S is quasiconvex in G relative to {Pi } by [Hru10, Cor
            1.3] and [BW13, Thm 4.16].
               Let Mg ⊂ M be the elevation of M g stabilized by Pi . We describe a convex Pi -
                      i                              i
            invariant subcomplex Yi ⊂ X  determined by M g . Let Ui be the family of halfspaces
                                                             i
            U in the wallspace M  for which there is some R > 0 with diam(U ∩ NR (M    g )) = ∞,
                                                                                         i
            where NR denotes the R-neighborhood. Note that Ui does not depend on the ﬁxed
            Riemannian metric on M . Let Yi ⊂ X        be the subcomplex consisting of cubes
            spanned by the vertices whose halfspaces are all in Ui .


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            324                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


                                                                    relative to {Yi } in the
               By [HW14, Thm 7.12] the group G acts cocompactly on X
                                                                   
            following sense. There exists a compact subcomplex K ⊂ X such that:
                  • X = GK ∪  GYi ;
                                   i
                  • g Yi ∩ Yj ⊂ GK unless j = i and g ∈ Pi ; and
                  • Pi acts cocompactly on Yi ∩ GK.
                                          by [HW14, Prop 8.1(1)] each Yi is superconvex in the
               Because G acts freely on X,
            sense that there is a uniform bound on the diameter of a rectangle [−d, d] × [0, 1],
                                                                        with [−d, d]×{0} ⊂ Yi
            whose 1-skeleton isometrically embeds in the 1-skeleton of X
                                       
            and [−d, d] × {1} outside Yi .
               Observe that G = π1 M splits as a graph of groups with transitional tori groups
            as edge groups. The group G is hyperbolic relative to the vertex groups Pi = π1 Mig .
            We now explain that to prove Theorem 1.1 it suﬃces to complement Theorem 2.1
            with the following.
            Theorem 2.4 (Specialization). Let G be the fundamental group of a graph of
            groups with free-abelian edge groups. Suppose that G is hyperbolic relative to some
            collection of the vertex groups {Pi }. Suppose that G acts cocompactly on a CAT(0)
            cube complex X   relative to superconvex {Yi }. Suppose also that:
                  (i) the action of G on X  is free and satisﬁes ﬁniteness Conditions (1)–(3) of
                      Criterion 2.3;
                 (ii) for any ﬁnite index subgroup E ◦ of an edge group E ⊂ Pi , there is a ﬁnite
                      index subgroup Pi ⊂ Pi with Pi ∩ E ⊂ E ◦ ;
                (iii) the action of each Pi on Yi is virtually special, with ﬁnitely many orbits of
                      codim-2-hyperplanes;
                (iv) each nonparabolic vertex group is virtually compact special.
            Then the action of G is virtually special.
               A codim-2-hyperplane in a CAT(0) cube complex is the intersection of a pair of
            intersecting hyperplanes.
               We now derive the hypothesis of Theorem 2.4 from the conclusion of Theorem 2.1.
            By Theorem 2.1(1), the action of π1 M on X       is free. Moreover, since the family S
            is ﬁnite, Condition (1) of Criterion 2.3 is satisﬁed. Since S is in general position,
            we have ﬁnitely many intersection curves between each pair of surfaces in S, which
            gives Condition (2). We now deduce Condition (3). Disjoint hyperplanes in a
            CAT(0) cube complex osculate (i.e., have dual edges sharing an endpoint) if and
            only if they are not separated by another hyperplane. (The “if” part follows from
            the observation that a hyperplane dual to an edge of a shortest path between the
            carriers of disjoint hyperplanes separates them.) Similarly, we say that two disjoint
                       S ∈ 
            surfaces S,       S osculate if there is no surface in  S separating S from S.
                                                                                             Hence
                                                                            
            osculating hyperplanes in X correspond to osculating S, S ∈ S. We need to show
            that there are ﬁnitely many Stab(S)  orbits of surfaces in                      Note
                                                                           S osculating with S.
                                     
            that if S osculates with S, then it must intersect one of the ﬁnitely many Stab(S)     
            orbits of graph manifold and hyperbolic blocks intersected by S,      since otherwise it
                                                                             
            would be separated from S by a transitional plane T . But T ∈ S by Theorem 2.1(2),
            so S and S would not osculate. If both S and S intersect the same block M g , then
                                                                                              i
            by Strong Separation (b) of Theorem 2.1(5) they are at bounded distance, and so
            there are ﬁnitely many Stab(S)   orbits. If S and S do not intersect the same graph



Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          325


            manifold block but intersect the same block M h , then by Strong Separation (a) of
                                                            k
            Theorem 2.1(5) they are at bounded distance, hence there are ﬁnitely many Stab(S) 
            orbits as well. This proves Condition (3) of Criterion 2.3. Hence, Hypothesis (i) of
            Theorem 2.4 is satisﬁed.
               Hypothesis (ii) of Theorem 2.4 coincides with [PW14, Cor 4.2], which is a par-
            ticular case of [Ham01, Thm 1]. To verify Hypothesis (iii) we need the following.
            Lemma 2.5. Let Sh be a ﬁnite family of geometrically ﬁnite immersed incompress-
            ible surfaces in a compact hyperbolic 3-manifold M h . There exists R such that if
            the stabilizer of an elevation S to Mh of a surface in Sh intersects a stabilizer of a
                                    
            boundary plane T ⊂ ∂ M along an inﬁnite cyclic group, then N = NR (S)
                                        h                                                  ∩ T is
            nonempty.
               Moreover, assume that we have two such elevations S,       S of possibly distinct
            surfaces. If S ∩ T and S ∩ T are nonempty and at distance ≥ R in the intrinsic
                                        

            metric on T (resp. N and N  = NR (S ) ∩ T are suﬃciently far with respect to some
            speciﬁed r), then S and S are disjoint (resp. at distance ≥ r) and T(S) ∩ T(S ) ⊂
              
            {T }.
               Note that N ⊂ T is at a ﬁnite Hausdorﬀ distance from a line, since the intersec-
            tion of the stabilizers of S and T is inﬁnite cyclic.
            Proof. We can assume that the Riemannian metric on M h is hyperbolic and the
            toroidal boundary components are horospherical. Thus in M   h we have well-deﬁned
            1-Lipschitz nearest point projections onto boundary planes. Note that these pro-
            jections are invariant under quasi-isometry, up to a uniformly bounded error.
               Consider an elevation S ⊂ M h of a surface in Sh and suppose that the stabilizer
            of S intersects a stabilizer of a boundary plane T along an inﬁnite cyclic group.
            The ﬁrst assertion saying that there exists a uniform R for which N = NR (S)  ∩ T is
            nonempty follows from the fact that the surfaces in S have ﬁnitely many maximal
                                                                   h

            parabolic subgroups.
               For the second assertion, let Π be the nearest point projection onto T. There
            exists a point s ∈ S with Π(s) ∈ N . Since S is geometrically ﬁnite, s is connected
            with any other point s of S by a geodesic γ at a uniformly bounded distance from
             A geodesic is an α-distorted path for any α in terms of [GP16, § 2.2]. We now
            S.
            apply [GP16, Prop 8.2.5], which is formulated in the Cayley graph of π1 M h , but
            all our notions are invariant under quasi-isometry. By [GP16, Prop 8.2.5] there is
            a uniform constant d such that Π(s ) ∈ Nd (Π(s)) or Π(s ) ∈ Nd (γ). Hence after
            increasing R, we have Π(S)   ⊂ N.
                                    
               Consider now S = S ∪ (T(S)
                                             − T). For each boundary plane T = T its image
            Π(T ) is uniformly bounded. Thus after increasing R, we have Π(S ) ⊂ N . Since
                 

            Π is 1-Lipschitz, the distance between S and S is bounded below by the distance
            between N and N  . This proves the second assertion.                               
               We now verify Hypothesis (iii) of Theorem 2.4, by appealing to Criterion 2.3.
            The action of Pi on Yi is free. By the choice of Ui in the deﬁnition of Yi , any
            hyperplane A intersecting Yi corresponds to a surface S ∈ 
                                                                         S that for some R > 0
                        g of inﬁnite diameter. Consequently, Stab(S)
            has NR (S) ∩ M                                              nontrivially intersects
                           i
            Pi = Stab(Mg ). By Lemma 2.5 we can assume that R coincides with the one given
                         i
            by Lemma 2.5.


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            326                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


                Condition (1) of Criterion 2.3 is immediate. To prove Conditions (2) and (3),
            it suﬃces to justify the claim that any pair of surfaces S,          S ∈ 
                                                                                        S with N =
                        g                   g
            NR (S) ∩ Mi , N = NR (S ) ∩ Mi suﬃciently far is separated by another surface
            in              S intersect M
                S. If both S,               g , then the claim follows from Strong Separation (b)
                                             i
            in Theorem 2.1(5). Otherwise, if one of S,    S is disjoint from Mg and they are not
                                                                                    i
            separated by a JSJ plane, then they both intersect a hyperbolic block M      h adjacent
                                                                                          k
            to M . By Lemma 2.5, for every r if N and N  are suﬃciently far, then S ∩ M
                   g                                                                             h
                   i                                                                               k
                      h                                   h           
            and S ∩ Mk are at distance ≥ r and T(S ∩ Mk ) ∩ T(S ∩ Mk ) = ∅. Then the claim
                                                                              h

            follows from Strong Separation (a). As a consequence of Condition (2) the complex
            Yi has ﬁnitely many Pi orbits of codim-2-hyperplanes.
                The nontrivial stabilizers in Pi of hyperplanes in Yi correspond to either fun-
            damental groups of the pieces of S in Mig , which are virtually embedded in Mig
            by Theorem 2.1(3) or inﬁnite cyclic subgroups of the fundamental groups of the
            transitional tori, to which by [PW14, Cor 4.3] (or [Ham01]) we can also asso-
            ciate virtually embedded ∂-parallel annuli. All these stabilizers are separable by
            [PW14, Thm 1.1] and double coset separable by [PW14, Thm 1.2]. Hence we have
            Conditions (4) and (5) of Criterion 2.3, and by Criterion 2.3 the action of Pi on Yi
            is virtually special. This is Hypothesis (iii).
                Hypothesis (iv) follows from the following.
            Theorem 2.6 ([Wis17, Thm 16.28]). Let M be a compact hyperbolic manifold with
            nonempty boundary. Then π1 M is virtually compact special.

                                            3. Surfaces in graph manifold blocks
                The goal of the next three sections is to prove Theorem 2.1 (Cubulation). We
            ﬁrst review the existence results for surfaces in graph manifolds with boundary. Let
            M g be a graph manifold, i.e., a compact connected oriented irreducible 3-manifold
            with only Seifert ﬁbered blocks in its JSJ decomposition. Assume ∂M g = ∅. If M g
            is Seifert ﬁbered, then an immersed incompressible surface S → M g is horizontal
            if it is transverse to the ﬁbers and vertical if it is a union of ﬁbers. An immersed
            incompressible surface S → M g that is not a ∂-parallel annulus is assumed to be
            homotoped so that its pieces are horizontal or vertical.
            Proposition 3.1 ([PW14, Prop 3.1]). Let M g be a graph manifold with ∂M g = ∅.
            There exists a ﬁnite cover Mg with a ﬁnite family Sg of embedded incompressible
            surfaces that are not ∂-parallel annuli such that:
                                   ⊂M
                  • for each block B    g and each torus T ⊂ ∂ B,  there is a surface S ∈ Sg
                                                                              
                    such that S ∩ T is nonempty and vertical with respect to B;
                                          
                  • for each block B ⊂ M there is a surface S ∈ S such that S ∩ B
                                              g                          g                 is
                    horizontal.
            Every block B⊂M  g is a product of a circle and a surface.

               Let F be a family of properly embedded essential arcs and curves in a compact
                                with geodesic boundary. We say that F strongly ﬁlls (resp.
            hyperbolic surface Σ
                  
            ﬁlls) Σ if the complementary components on Σ     of the geodesic representatives of
            the arcs and curves in F are discs (resp. discs or annuli parallel to the components
                  This does not depend on the choice of the hyperbolic metric on Σ.
            of ∂ Σ).                                                                    



Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          327


            Construction 3.2. Let M g be a non-thin graph manifold with ∂M g = ∅. Consider
            g and Sg satisfying Proposition 3.1. Add the following surfaces to Sg :
            M
                  • all JSJ tori of Mg ;
                                                ⊂M
                  • vertical tori in each block B   g , whose base curves ﬁll the base Σ
                                                                                         of B.
                                                                                             
            Then the base arcs and curves of the vertical pieces of S in B
                                                                      g    strongly ﬁll Σ.
                                                                                          We
            retain the notation Sg for the projection of this extended family to M g .
            Remark 3.3. Let Sg be the family from Construction 3.2. Let B be a block of
            M g . For each g ∈ π1 B, some piece of Sg in B is a cut-surface for g.
               To prove Strong Separation in Theorem 2.1 (Cubulation), we will need the fol-
            lowing WallNbd-WallNbd Separation property in blocks.
            Deﬁnition 3.4 ([HW14, §8.3]). Let S be a family of immersed incompressible
            surfaces in a compact Riemannian 3-manifold M . Let   S be the family of elevations
                                                          
            of the surfaces in S to the universal cover M of M . The family S has WallNbd-
            WallNbd Separation if for any r there is d = d(r) such that if S,     S ∈ 
                                                                                         S have
                                                                        
            neighborhoods Nr (S), Nr (S ) at distance ≥ d, then Nr (S), Nr (S ) are separated by
            a surface in S. This property is independent of the choice of Riemannian metric,
            but the value of d might vary. Similarly S has Ball-Ball Separation if for any r
            there is d such that each pair of metric r-balls at distance ≥ d is separated by a
            surface in 
                       S.
               We analogously deﬁne WallNbd-WallNbd Separation and Ball-Ball Separation
            for a family of essential arcs and curves in a compact hyperbolic surface.
               The following is easy to prove directly, but for uniformity of our arguments, we
            will deduce it in Section 4 from Criterion 4.3.
            Lemma 3.5. A strongly ﬁlling family of arcs and curves in a hyperbolic surface Σ  
            satisﬁes WallNbd-WallNbd Separation. Consequently, if their base arcs and curves
                                                             as well as in B satisfy WallNbd-
            strongly ﬁll, then the vertical pieces of Sg in B
            WallNbd Separation.
               Let Σ be the base orbifold of a non-thin block B ⊂ M g . The fundamental groups
            of the components of ∂Σ intersect trivially. Thus by the compactness of the base
            arcs of the annular vertical pieces of Sg in B, we have the following analogue of
            Lemma 2.5.
            Remark 3.6. Let Sg be a ﬁnite family of immersed incompressible surfaces in a
            non-thin graph manifold M g . There exists R with the following property. Let
            B ⊂ M g be a block with elevation B      ⊂M   g , and let S,
                                                                         S be elevations to M
                                                                                               g of
            surfaces in S . Suppose that So = S ∩ B
                          g                                and So = S ∩ B
                                                                            are both vertical, and
            suppose that there is a plane T ⊂ ∂ B intersecting both So and So . If the distance
                                                                         
            between the lines So ∩ T and So ∩ T is ≥ R in the intrinsic metric on T, then So
            and So are disjoint and T(So ) ∩ T(So ) = {T}.
                 In [PW14] we also established the following.
            Corollary 3.7 ([PW14, Cor 3.3]). Let M g be a graph manifold with ∂M g = ∅.
            There exists a ﬁnite cover Mg of M g such that for each essential circle C in a
            torus T ⊂ ∂ M  g                                                 g with SC ∩ T
                          there is an incompressible surface SC embedded in M
            consisting of a nonempty set of circles parallel to C.


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            328                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


                  Finally, the following holds by [RW98, Thm 2.3].
            Lemma 3.8. Let S be an incompressible surface embedded in a graph manifold
            M g . Let S  → S be a ﬁnite cover. Then S  → M g is virtually embedded.

                                                 4. Surfaces in hyperbolic blocks
               We now review the existence results for surfaces in hyperbolic blocks. First we
            establish a hyperbolic analogue of Proposition 3.1.
            Theorem 4.1 (Compare [Wis17, Cor 16.32]). Let M h be a compact hyperbolic
            3-manifold with nonempty boundary. There is in M h a ﬁnite family Sh of geo-
            metrically ﬁnite immersed incompressible surfaces containing cut-surfaces for all
            elements of π1 M h . Moreover, the surfaces have no accidental parabolics, i.e., any
            parabolic element in π1 S with S ∈ Sh lies in π1 C for some component C of ∂S.
            Proof. We follow the proof of [Wis17, Lem 16.31]. By Theorem 2.6, without loss
            of generality we can assume π1 M h = π1 X for a compact special cube complex
            X. Since π1 M h acts freely on the universal cover X       of X, for every g ∈ π1 M h
            there is a CAT(0) geodesic axis R ⊂ X.    Let A  ⊂X    be any hyperplane intersected
                                                           
            transversely by γ. Since A is convex in X, the subgroup Stab(A)            ⊂ π1 M h is
            undistorted, hence geometrically ﬁnite by [Hru10, Thm 1.5 and Cor 1.3].
                Let Mh ⊂ H3 be the universal cover of M h . The boundary of the hyperbolic
            convex core N of the Stab(A)    cover of M h consists of ﬁnitely many geometrically
            ﬁnite surfaces. Suppose ﬁrst that g is hyperbolic. Since M        h and X   are quasi-
                                                                                     
            isometric, the geodesic axis R for g in M intersects an elevation N of N . Thus
                                                          h

            there is an elevation S ⊂ ∂ N of a surface S ⊂ ∂N intersecting R as well. Hence S
            is a cut-surface for g.
                Let Σ, Σ be the two noded surfaces at inﬁnity obtained from the domain of
            discontinuity of π1 S by quotienting by π1 S. The intersection of the convex hull of
            the limit set of π1 S with M h is contained in N   , thus lies on one side of S.
                                                                                             Thus
            the surface Σ on the opposite side does not have nodes, in the sense that it is
            homeomorhpic to S. Hence parabolic elements in π1 S correspond to the nodes of
            Σ , which form a family of essential circles Cj on S that are embedded and disjoint.
            (See [Kap01, §4.23 p. 112] for an argument using Margulis tubes.)  Then a boundary
            surface of the convex core for one of the components of S − j Cj is a cut-surface
            for g and has no accidental parabolics.
                In the case where g is parabolic, we replace in the argument above the g-invariant
            geodesic R in M h by a g-invariant horocycle R. The rest of the argument remains
            the same.                                                                             
            4.1. WallNbd-WallNbd Separation. We now describe a tool from [HW14] for
            verifying WallNbd-WallNbd Separation in relatively hyperbolic spaces.
            Deﬁnition 4.2. Let S be a ﬁnite family of immersed incompressible surfaces in
            a compact Riemannian 3-manifold M . Let      S be the family of elevations of the
                                                  of M . Let T ⊂ M be a connected subspace,
            surfaces in S to the universal cover M
            and let T be its elevation to M
                                           .
               We say that S satisﬁes WallNbd-WallNbd Separation in T if for any r there is d
                          S ∈ 
            such that if S,      S have nonempty N = Nr (S) ∩ T, N  = Nr (S ) ∩ T at distance
            ≥ d, then N and N are separated in T by a restriction to T of a surface in 
                                 
                                                                                             S.


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          329


                We say that S satisﬁes Ball-WallNbd Separation in T if for any r there is d
            such that if S ∈                          ∩ T and m is a point of T with
                                S has nonempty N = Nr (S)
            N = Nr (m) ∩ T at distance ≥ d from N , then N and N  are separated in T by a
                            
            restriction to T of a surface in 
                                              S.
            Criterion 4.3 ([HW14, Cor 8.10]). Let S be a ﬁnite family of
               (a) essential arcs and curves in a compact hyperbolic surface M satisfying Ball-
                   Ball Separation; or
               (b) immersed incompressible surfaces in a compact Riemannian 3-manifold M .
                   Let Ti ⊂ M be connected subspaces. Suppose that π1 M is hyperbolic relative
                   to Ei ⊂ π1 M that are the images of π1 Ti . Assume that π1 S is relatively
                   quasiconvex for each S ∈ S. Suppose that S satisﬁes Ball-Ball Separation in
                   M and WallNbd-WallNbd Separation and Ball-WallNbd Separation in all
                   Ti .
            Then S satisﬁes WallNbd-WallNbd Separation in M .
                 The hypothesis of Ball-Ball Separation can be veriﬁed using the following.
            Lemma 4.4 ([HW14, Lem 5.3]). Let S be a ﬁnite family of
                 (a) essential arcs and curves in a compact hyperbolic surface M ; or
                (b) immersed incompressible surfaces in a compact Riemannian 3-manifold M .
            If the action of π1 M on the associated dual CAT(0) cube complex is free, then S
            satisﬁes Ball-Ball Separation.
                 Consequently, Criterion 4.3(a) and Lemma 4.4(a) yield Lemma 3.5.
            Corollary 4.5. Let Sh be a ﬁnite family of geometrically ﬁnite surfaces in a hy-
            perbolic 3-manifold M h . Suppose that:
                 (i) for each g ∈ π1 M h there is a cut-surface for g in Sh ; and
                (ii) for each parabolic element g ∈ π1 S with S ∈ Sh there is a surface S  ∈ Sh
                     with a curve C ⊂ ∂S  such that g n is conjugate to an element of π1 C for
                     some n = 0.
            Then S satisﬁes WallNbd-WallNbd Separation in M h .
                 Let ∂t M h ⊂ ∂M h denote the union of toroidal boundary components.
            Proof. We verify the hypotheses of Criterion 4.3(b). Ball-Ball Separation in M h
            follows from Hypothesis (i) and Lemma 4.4(b). We now verifyWallNbd-WallNbd
            Separation and Ball-WallNbd Separation in a torus Ti , where i Ti = ∂t M h . Con-
            sider an elevation T of Ti to the universal cover Mh of M h . For any r there is d
                                                             
            such that the intersections Nr (S) ∩ T or Nr (m) ∩ T from the deﬁnition of WallNbd-
            WallNbd Separation and Ball-WallNbd Separation are either of diameter ≤ d
            or at Hausdorﬀ distance ≤ d from a line C      in T stabilized by g ∈ π1 S ∩ π1 Ti .
            For S ∈ S , the intersections S ∩ T are inﬁnite families of parallel lines. By
                       h                       

            Hypothesis (ii), their directions include the direction of each C above. This yields
            WallNbd-WallNbd Separation and Ball-WallNbd Separation in Ti .                     

            4.2. Capping oﬀ surfaces. We will need one more crucial piece of information
            concerning the existence of surfaces in hyperbolic blocks with designated boundary
            circles.


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            330                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


            Proposition 4.6. Let M h be a compact hyperbolic 3-manifold, and let C0 , . . . , Cn
            be essential circles in the tori T0 · · · Tn = ∂t M h . There exists a geometrically
            ﬁnite immersed incompressible surface S → M h with S ∩ ∂t M h covering C0 and
            such that every parabolic element of π1 S is conjugate into π1 Ci for some i.
              In the proof we will need the following relative version of the Special Quotient
            Theorem.
            Theorem 4.7 ([Wis17, Lem 15.3]). Let G be a compact special group that is hyper-
            bolic relative to free-abelian subgroups {Ei }. Then there are ﬁnite index subgroups
            Ei◦ ⊂ Ei such that for any further subgroups Eic ⊂ Ei◦ with Ei /Eic ﬁnite or vir-
            tually cyclic, the quotient G/ {Eic } is hyperbolic and virtually compact special.
            Moreover, each Ei /Eic embeds into G/ {Eic }.
                  We will also use the following combination theorem.
            Theorem 4.8 ([MP09, Thm 1.1]). Let S ⊂ M h be an incompressible geometrically
            ﬁnite surface in a hyperbolic manifold M h . Let Cj be components of ∂S contained
            in boundary tori Tij of M h (some Tij may coincide). Then for all but ﬁnitely many
            cyclic covers Tj of Tij to which Cj lift, the fundamental group π1 S  of the graph
            of spaces S  obtained by amalgamating S with Tj along Cj embeds in π1 M h and is
            relatively quasiconvex. Moreover, every parabolic subgroup of π1 S  is conjugate in
            π1 S  to a subgroup of π1 S or π1 Tj .
            Proof of Proposition 4.6. By Theorem 2.6 without loss of generality we can assume
            that G = π1 M h is compact special. By Theorem 4.7 there are gi ∈ π1 Ci such that
            G = G/ {gi } is hyperbolic and virtually compact special. For a subgroup F ⊂ G
            we denote by F its image in G. Additionally, by Theorem 4.7 we obtain that for
            each E = π1 T with T ⊂ ∂t M h the quotient E ⊂ G is inﬁnite. We will prove that
            there is a ﬁnite index normal subgroup G ⊂ G satisfying the following.
                 (i) For each E = π1 T the image of E ∩ G → H1 (G ) has rank 1.
                (ii) The cover M  of M h corresponding to G has
                                                
                                 rk H2 (M  )/im H2 (∂M  ) → H2 (M  ) ≥ 2.
               Properties (i) and (ii) above are preserved when passing to further ﬁnite covers,
            so it suﬃces to achieve them separately. To obtain Property (i), let E = π1 T .
            By canonical completion and retraction (see Theorem 6.3), there is a ﬁnite index
                                                                                         
            subgroup G ⊂ G that retracts onto an inﬁnite cyclic subgroup Z ⊂ E ∩ G . Thus
                                                             
            Z embeds in H1 (G ). The preimage G ⊂ G of G ⊂ G satisﬁes Property (i) for the
            speciﬁed E. Property (ii) follows directly from [CLR97, Cor 1.4].
                                                                                   
               By Property (i), there is a map f∗ : G → Z factoring through H1 (G ) and with f∗
                                   −1                             
            nontrivial on each g Eg ∩ G with g ∈ G. Let f : M → S be a map inducing f∗ .
                                                                         1

            By Sard’s theorem there is a point s ∈ S 1 so that S  = f −1 (s) ⊂ M  is a properly
            embedded surface, possibly disconnected. Then S  ∩ ∂t M  is a union of families
            of identically oriented circles covering Ci . We compress S  to an incompressible
            surface with the same boundary.
               We now claim that if S  is a virtual ﬁber, thus a ﬁber since S  is embedded,
            then without changing ∂S  , we can change S  so that it is geometrically ﬁnite.
            In H2 (M  , ∂M  ; R) we consider the Thurston norm ball Bx ; see [Thu86]. Let
            L ⊂ H2 (M  , ∂M  ; R) be the subspace of homology classes whose restriction to
            H1 (∂M  ; R) is proportional to [∂S  ]. By Property (ii) the rank of the image of


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          331


            H2 (M  ) in H2 (M  , ∂M  ) is ≥ 2. Hence the dimension of L is ≥ 2. We can take
            S  represented by a point on a ray not passing through a maximal face of Bx ∩ L.
            By [Thu86, Thm 3] the surface S  is not a ﬁber of M  . By the Covering [Thu80]
            and Tameness [Bon86] Theorems the surface S  is geometrically ﬁnite, proving the
            claim.
                Let So be a component of S  intersecting T0 . Note that each parabolic element of
            π1 So is conjugate into π1 C  for some component C  ⊂ ∂S  since S  intersects all the
            boundary tori of M  . Consequently, all parabolic elements of π1 So are conjugate
            into π1 Ci .
                Since So is geometrically ﬁnite, Theorem 4.8 applies to So . Let {Cj } be the
            components of ∂So outside T0 , and for each j let Tij denote the torus containing
            Cj . Let S  be the graph of spaces obtained by amalgamating So along Cj with
            Tj provided by Theorem 4.8. Then S  → M  extends to an immersion N → M  ,
            where N is the regular neighborhood of S  in the π1 S  cover of M  . Let S be the
            non-toroidal component of ∂N that is the component that can be decomposed into
            two surfaces parallel to So and annuli parallel to Tj combined along curves parallel
            to Cj . The immersed surface S → M  is incompressible, since π1 S embeds in π1 S  .
            Moreover, S is not a virtual ﬁber since π1 S ∗ is relatively quasiconvex and of inﬁnite
            index in π1 M h . By Theorem 4.8 every parabolic element of π1 S is conjugate in
            π1 S  to a parabolic element of π1 So or into one of the π1 Tj . But each parabolic
            element of π1 So is conjugate into some π1 Ci . Moreover, the intersection of π1 S
            with a π1 S  conjugate of π1 Tj lies in a conjugate of π1 Cj . Thus the immersion
            S → M  → M h has the desired property for parabolic elements.                          

                                                                   5. Cubulation
              In this section we combine the surfaces described in the graph manifold blocks
            and hyperbolic blocks. To prove Theorem 2.1 (Cubulation) we need the following:
            Lemma 5.1. Let S be a connected compact surface with χ(S) < 0. There exists
            K = K(S) such that for each assignment of a positive integer nC to each boundary
            circle C ⊂ ∂S, there is a connected ﬁnite cover S → S whose degree on each
            component of the preimage of C equals KnC .
              We can allow S to be disconnected. We can also allow annular components but
            obviously require that the integers nC coincide for both boundary circles of such a
            component.

            Proof. Let K = K(S) be the degree of a cover of S with nonzero genus. The lemma
            follows from [PW14, Lem 4.6].                                                 

            Proof of Theorem 2.1. The proof has two steps. In the ﬁrst step we construct a
            family S of surfaces satisfying Theorem 2.1(1)–(4). In the second step we prove
            that S satisﬁes the Strong Separation property in Theorem 2.1(5).

            Construction. Let Shk be the family of surfaces in Mkh given by Theorem 4.1. Let
            C be the family of circles embedded in the transitional tori of M that are covered
            by the boundary circles of the surfaces in {Shk } up to homotopy on the tori. Note
            that every transitional torus contains circles of C. Let Ci ⊂ C be the circles lying
            in ∂Mig .


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            332                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


                By Corollary 3.7 each circle C ∈ Ci is covered by a boundary circle of an im-
                                                       g
            mersed incompressible surface SC             → Mig virtually embedded in Mig . Let Sgi be the
            family of surfaces in Mi provided by Construction 3.2, and let Sg
                                           g                                                  g     g
                                                                                      i = Si ∪{SC }C∈Ci .
                Let C denote the family of circles embedded in the transitional tori of M covered
            (up to homotopy) by the boundary circles of the surfaces in {Sg                          
                                                                                         i }. Let Ck ⊂ C
                                                                                                            

            be the circles lying in ∂Mkh . By Proposition 4.6 for each circle C  ∈ Ck , there
                                                                                      → Mk such that
                                                                                   h            h
            is a geometrically ﬁnite immersed incompressible surface SC
                                                           
            SC  ∩ ∂t Mk is nonempty and covers C . Moreover, we require that all the parabolic
              h          h
                                                                               h
                                      are conjugate to π1 C with C ∈ C . Let Sk = Sk ∪ {SC  }C  ∈C .
                                   h                                                     h        h
            elements of π1 SC                                                                           k

                We will apply Lemma 5.1 to produce families of surfaces {            Sh      g
                                                                                        k }, {Si } covering
            {Sh      g                            h    g
               k }, {Si } such that So = {Sk } ∪ {Si } has the following property. There is a
            uniform d such that for each circle in C , each component of its preimage in a
            surface in So covers it with degree d. In order to arrange this for a boundary circle
                                                 g
            C of a surface in {Sh      k } ∪ {Si }, let dC denote the degree with which C maps onto
                             
            a circle in C . Let nC = dC C dC . Applying Lemma 5.1 with this choice of {nC }
                                              1

            provides the uniform d = K C dC . Note that for an annular surface the degrees
            dC coincide and hence the numbers nC coincide. We can then take a cyclic cover.
                We will now extend each surface So ∈ So to a surface immersed properly in M by
            combining appropriately many copies of other surfaces in So . First assume So ∈            Sg
                                                                                                          i .
                          
            Let Co ⊂ C denote the set of circles covered by the boundary components of So ,
            and let mC  denote the number of components of So mapping to the circle C  ∈ Co .
            Denote by SC      h
                                  the surface in So covering SC  , and denote by lC  the number of
                                                                   h

                                               h              
            boundary components of SC  covering C . Let L = C  ∈Co lC  . Take 2L copies of
            So and 2mC  L copies of Sh  , for each C  , with two opposite orientations. These
                                  lC                     C
            surfaces combine to form a desired immersed incompressible surface extending So .
            Note that for each C  ∈ C the surface SC h
                                                           appears within such an extension of

                                 
            some surface So ∈ Si .g

               Hence it remains to consider the case So ∈   Shk ⊂ 
                                                                   Sh         h
                                                                    k , where Sk is the family of
            surfaces covering the surfaces in Sk . This case is treated similarly to the previous
                                                 h

            one. Let Co ⊂ C be the set of circles covered by the boundary components of So .
            Consider all the surfaces SC
                                        g            g
                                           covering SC for C ∈ Co . Let Co ⊂ C denote the set of
            circles covered by the boundary components of these surfaces SC  g
                                                                                . Consider all the
            surfaces SC  , where C ∈ Co . Gluing the appropriate number of copies of So , SC
                       h                                                                       g
                                                                                                   ,
                  h
            and SC  gives the desired extension.
               We denote the union of both of these families of extended surfaces together with
            the family of the JSJ tori by S. So S obviously satisﬁes Theorem 2.1(2). Observe
            that Theorem 2.1(1) follows from Theorem 2.1(2) and the existence of cut-surfaces
            in Theorem 4.1 and Construction 3.2. The surfaces in      Sg
                                                                        i are virtually embedded
            in Mi by Lemma 3.8, hence S satisﬁes Theorem 2.1(3). The surfaces in 
                  g
                                                                                           Sh
                                                                                            k are
            geometrically ﬁnite, and thus S satisﬁes Theorem 2.1(4).
                                                                                                h
               We also record that by the way we have applied Proposition 4.6 to construct SC     ,

            the pieces of S in every hyperbolic block Mk satisfy Hypothesis (ii) of Corollary 4.5.
                                                        h



            Strong Separation. We now verify Theorem 2.1(5). We adopt the convention
            that in thin graph manifold blocks T × I we choose the vertical direction so that all
            the pieces in T ×I of the surfaces in S are horizontal. Let R be a constant satisfying


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          333


            Lemma 2.5 and Remark 3.6 in all hyperbolic and non-thin graph manifold blocks
            of M , with respect to the pieces of S.
                We ﬁrst prove Strong Separation (b). Suppose that S,           S ∈  S intersect a graph
            manifold block Mi ⊂ M . We need to show that if S ∩ M
                                 g                                                g and S ∩ M
                                                                                      i
                                                                                                      g are
                                                                                                        i
            suﬃciently far, then S and S are separated by another surface in 
                                              
                                                                                            S.
                First consider the case where S intersects a JSJ or boundary plane T of M               g
                                                                                                             i
            intersected by S.  Since by Theorem 2.1(1) the components of S ∩ M g are virtually
                                                                                              i
            embedded, there is h ∈ Stab(T) such that the surfaces S ∩ M           g and hS ∩ M
                                                                                       i
                                                                                                      g are
                                                                                                        i
            disjoint. Moreover, by passing to a power of h, we can assume that they are at
            distance ≥ R. Let M    hor ⊂ M  g be the maximal graph manifold containing T such
                                                i
            that S is horizontal in all the blocks of M  hor . In the extreme cases M      hor can equal
            M or T. Let N
                g               be the union of M   hor with the adjacent hyperbolic and Seifert
               i
            ﬁbered blocks. By Lemma 2.5 and Remark 3.6 the surfaces S ∩ N                 and hS ∩ N  are
                                                                      
            disjoint and the boundary lines of S ∩ N and hS ∩ N do not intersect a common
            JSJ plane outside M   hor . Hence the entire S and hS are disjoint.
                For each S and T we ﬁx h as above. The surface hS ∩ M            hor is in a bounded
            neighborhood of S ∩ M    hor . Hence if S ∩ Mg is suﬃciently far from S ∩ M
                                                               i
                                                                                                    g , then
                                                                                                      i
            S ∩ Mhor is at distance ≥ R from each of h±1 S ∩ M      hor . As before, S is disjoint
            from both h±1 S,   and one of h±1 S separates S from S,    as desired. Since there are
            ﬁnitely many Stab(S ∩ M      ) orbits of JSJ or boundary planes T of M
                                          g
                                          i
                                                                                              g intersected
                                                                                                i
            by S,  this argument works for all T simultaneously.
                To complete the proof of Strong Separation (b) it remains to consider a second
            case where S intersects a Seifert ﬁbered block M      o ⊂ M  g intersected by S,
                                                                               i
                                                                                                     but is
            disjoint from the JSJ and boundary planes of M          intersected by S.
                                                                      g                       In that case
                                                                     i
                                       
            the pieces of S and S in Mo are vertical. Since the proof for Strong Separation (a)
            is the same, we perform it simultaneously: in that case M         o denotes the hyperbolic
            block M h . In both cases if we denote as usual by T(S ∩ M          o ) the set of JSJ and
                      k
            boundary planes in ∂ Mo intersecting S, then T(S ∩ Mo ) and T(S ∩ M
                                                                                        o ) are disjoint.
                As before, for any JSJ or boundary plane T ∈ T(S ∩ M           o ), we ﬁx h ∈ Stab(T)
            such that S and hS are disjoint. We do the same with S replaced by S . There is
                                                                            
            R such that for each T, the translate hS ∩ T is contained in the R -neighborhood
            of S ∩ T in the intrinsic metric on T, and the same property holds with S replaced
            by S . Let d = d(r) be a WallNbd-WallNbd Separation constant guaranteed by
            Lemma 3.5 and Corollary 4.5 for r = R + R in all hyperbolic and non-thin Seifert
            ﬁbered blocks with respect to the pieces of S.
                If the piece S ∩ M o is at distance ≥ 2r + d from the piece S ∩ M           o , then by
            WallNbd-WallNbd Separation there is a surface S∗ ∈          S such that S∗ ∩ M   o separates
            Nr (S ∩ Mo ) from Nr (S ∩ M o ) in M
                                                    o . If T(S∗ ∩ Mo ) is disjoint from T(S ∩ M    o ) ∪
                               ∗                          
            T(S ∩ Mo ), then S is disjoint from S and S and separates them, as desired.
                Otherwise, if T(S∗ ∩M o ) intersects T(S ∩M
                                                              o )∪T(S∩  M o ), we can assume without
            loss of generality that there is a JSJ or boundary plane T ∈ T(S∗ ∩ M
                                                                                           o )∩T(S ∩ Mo ).
            By the deﬁnition of R and r = R + R , there is a translate hS disjoint from S
                                                                                       

            such that hS ∩ T separates S ∩ T from NR (S∗ ∩ T) in the intrinsic metric on
            T. Moreover, by Remark 3.6 or Lemma 2.5 the surface hS ∩ M               o is disjoint from




Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            334                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


            S∗ ∩ M
                  o and T(hS ∩ Mo ) intersects T(S∗ ∩ M
                                                           o ) only in T. Hence hS and S are
            disjoint and hS separates S from S,
                                                  as desired.                                 


                                        6. Separability in special cube complexes
              The goal of the next three sections is to prove Theorem 2.4 (Specialization). We
            begin with reviewing the deﬁnition of a special cube complex.

            6.1. Special cube complexes.
            Deﬁnition 6.1 (Compare [HW08, Def 3.2]). Let X be a nonpositively curved
            cube complex, possibly not compact. A midcube (resp. codim-2-midcube) of an
            n-cube [0, 1]n = I n is the subspace obtained by restricting exactly one (resp. two)
            coordinate to 12 . Let M denote the disjoint union of all midcubes (resp. codim-2-
            midcubes) of X. An immersed hyperplane (resp. immersed codim-2-hyperplane) of
            X is a connected component of the quotient of M by the inclusion maps.
                An immersed hyperplane (resp. immersed codim-2-hyperplane) A of X self-
            intersects if it contains two diﬀerent midcubes (resp. codim-2-midcubes) of the
            same cube of X. If A does not self-intersect, then it embeds into X, and it is
            called a hyperplane (resp. codim-2-hyperplane). If the hyperplanes of X do not self-
            intersect, which happens for example when X is CAT(0), then codim-2-hyperplanes
            are components of intersections of pairs of intersecting hyperplanes. For an im-
            mersed hyperplane A, the map A → X is π1 -injective since it is a local isometry.
            We shall regard π1 A as a subgroup of π1 X.
                An edge e is dual to an immersed hyperplane A if A contains the midcube of e.
            A hyperplane A is two-sided if one can orient all of its dual edges so that any two
            that are parallel in a square s of X are oriented consistently within s.
                If a hyperplane A is two-sided and we orient its dual edges as above, we say that
            A directly self-osculates if it has two dual edges with the same initial vertex or with
            the same terminal vertex. If A is two-sided and the initial vertex of one of its dual
            edges coincides with the terminal vertex of another or the same dual edge, then A
            indirectly self-osculates.
                Distinct hyperplanes A, B interosculate if there are dual edges e1 , e2 of A and
            f1 , f2 of B such that e1 , f1 lie in a square and e2 , f2 share a vertex but do not lie
            in a square.
                A nonpositively curved cube complex is special if its immersed hyperplanes do
            not self-intersect, are two-sided, and do not directly self-osculate or interosculate.
                A group is special if it is the fundamental group of a special cube complex.
               Note that we do not require special cube complexes to be compact. However, in
            this article we will always assume that they have ﬁnitely many hyperplanes.
            Theorem 6.2 ([HW08, Thm 4.2]). A special cube complex X with ﬁnitely many
            hyperplanes admits a local isometry X → R(X) into the Salvetti complex R(X) of
            a ﬁnitely generated right-angled Artin group.
               The generators of the Artin group correspond to the hyperplanes of X. Each
            edge of X dual to a hyperplane A ⊂ X is mapped by the local isometry to an edge
            of R(X) labeled by the generator corresponding to A. Note that R(X) is compact
            special.


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          335


               Our goal is to revisit and strengthen hyperplane separability and double hyper-
            plane separability established in [HW08] for compact special cube complexes. The
            starting point and the main tool is the following.
            Theorem 6.3 ([HW08, Cor 6.7]). Let Y → X be a local isometry from a compact
            cube complex Y to a special cube complex X. There is a ﬁnite cover X  → X, called
            the canonical completion of Y → X, to which Y lifts and a canonical retraction
            map X  → Y ⊂ X, restricting to the identity on Y , which is continuous and maps
                           
            hyperplanes of X intersecting Y into themselves.
               If one ﬁrst subdivides X (or takes an appropriate cover) to eliminate indirect
            self-osculations, then the canonical retraction can be made cellular.
               All paths that we discuss in X are assumed to be combinatorial. Let ||X|| denote
            the minimum of the lengths of essential closed paths in X or ∞ if X is contractible.
            Lemma 6.4. Let X be a special cube complex with ﬁnitely many hyperplanes. Then
                                               of X with ||X||
            for each d there is a ﬁnite cover X              > d.
                 Note that the above property is preserved when passing to further covers.
            Proof. Let X → R = R(X) be the local isometry into the Salvetti complex of the
            ﬁnitely generated right-angled Artin group F coming from Theorem 6.2. Since R
            is compact, there is a ﬁnite set F of conjugacy classes of elements of F that can be
            represented by closed paths of length ≤ d in R. Since F is residually ﬁnite, it has a
            ﬁnite index subgroup F disjoint from the set of elements whose classes lie in F. Let
            R → R be the ﬁnite cover corresponding to F ⊂ F . Then ||R|| > d. Let X  → X be
                                                
            the pullback of R → R. Since X → R is a local isometry, it is π1 -injective, and we
                    > d as desired.
            have ||X||                                                                         
            6.2. Separability. A subgroup H of a group G is separable if for each g ∈ G − H,
            there is a ﬁnite index subgroup F of G with g ∈/ F H.
            Deﬁnition 6.5. Let X be a nonpositively curved cube complex, and let X       be its
            universal cover. Let A be an immersed hyperplane in X with an elevation A     in X.
                                                                                              
                                                                          
            The carrier N (A) is the smallest subcomplex of X containing A. It is isomorphic
            with A × I. The carrier N (A) is the quotient of N (A)
                                                                   by Stab(A).  There is an
            induced map N (A) → X. If A does not self-intersect and does not self-osculate
            (directly or indirectly), then N (A) embeds in X and we identify it with its image.
            We similarly deﬁne carriers of immersed codim-2-hyperplanes.
               A path α → X starting (resp. ending) at a vertex v of N (A) is a path that starts
            (resp. ends) at the image of v in X. The path α is in N (A) if it lifts to a path in
            N (A). The path α is path-homotopic into N (A) if it is path-homotopic to a path
            in N (A).
            Deﬁnition 6.6. An immersed hyperplane A in a cube complex X has injectivity
            radius > d if each path of length ≤ 2d in X starting and ending at N (A) is path-
            homotopic into N (A). In particular if d = 0, then A does not self-intersect or
                                                                                         of X are
            self-osculate. Equivalently, all elevations of N (A) to the universal cover X
            at distance > 2d.
            Lemma 6.7. Let X be a special cube complex with ﬁnitely many hyperplanes. Let
                                                                           → X such that
            A ⊂ X be a hyperplane. Then for each d there is a ﬁnite cover X
                          ⊂X
            any elevation A   of A has injectivity radius > d.



Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            336                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


               In the compact case, Lemma 6.7 and the following consequence was proved in
            [HW08, Cor 9.7] using Theorem 6.3. Note that the conclusion of Lemma 6.7 is
            preserved when passing to further covers.
            Corollary 6.8. Let G be the fundamental group of a virtually special cube complex
            with ﬁnitely many hyperplanes, and let H ⊂ G be the fundamental group of an
            immersed hyperplane. Then H is separable in G.
            Proof of Lemma 6.7. As before, let X → R = R(X) be the local isometry into the
            Salvetti complex of the ﬁnitely generated right-angled Artin group F coming from
            Theorem 6.2. Let T be the hyperplane in R that is the image of the hyperplane A.
            Since R is compact, it admits ﬁnitely many paths starting and ending at N (T ) of
            length ≤ 2d, not path-homotopic into N (T ). Let F denote the family of conjugacy
            classes determined by closing them up by paths in N (T ). Then F is a union
            of classes determined by ﬁnitely many nontrivial cosets of the form Hg, where
            H = π1 T . Since hyperplane subgroups in F are separable [HW08, Cor 9.4], there
            is a ﬁnite index subgroup F ⊂ F disjoint from the set of elements whose classes lie
            in F. Let R  → R be the ﬁnite cover corresponding to F ⊂ F . Then elevations of T
            to R have injectivity radius > d. Let X → X be the pullback of R  → R.
                                                                            
               We verify that X is the desired cover. The universal cover X of X embeds into
            the universal cover R  of R as a convex subcomplex. Let A     be an elevation of A
                                                                     
            to X, and let T be the elevation of T to R containing A. The π1 X        orbit of A
                                                                                               
                                                                                    
            is contained in the π1 R orbit of a T . Since π1 R translates of N (T ) in R are at
            distance > 2d, so are the π1 X translates of N (A)
                                                              in X.
                                                                                              
            6.3. Double coset separability. Let H1 , H2 ⊂ G be subgroups of a group G.
            The double coset H1 H2 is separable if for each g ∈ G − H1 H2 there is a ﬁnite index
            subgroup F of G with g ∈/ F H1 H2 .
            Deﬁnition 6.9. Let A be a hyperplane in a nonpositively curved cube complex
            X. Let A  be an elevation of A to the universal cover X
                                                                    of X. Let A
                                                                               +d ⊂ X be the
            combinatorial ball of radius d around the carrier of A. We say that A is d-locally
                     +d has ﬁnitely many Stab(A) orbits of hyperplanes.
            ﬁnite if A
               In particular A is 0-locally ﬁnite if there are ﬁnitely many Stab(A) orbits of
                                       If, additionally, there are ﬁnitely many Stab(A) orbits
            hyperplanes intersecting A.
            of hyperplanes osculating with A, then A is 1-locally ﬁnite.
            Lemma 6.10. Let G be the fundamental group of a special cube complex with
            ﬁnitely many hyperplanes. Let H1 , H2 ⊂ G be conjugates of the fundamental groups
            of hyperplanes one of which is d-locally ﬁnite for all d. Then the double coset H1 H2
            is separable in G.
               While Lemma 6.10 could be avoided in the proof of Theorem 1.1, we include it
            to shed more light on double hyperplane separability.
            Proof of Lemma 6.10. Let X   be the universal cover of the special cube complex X
            with π1 X = G and ﬁnitely many hyperplanes. Let A,        B
                                                                       ⊂X   be the hyperplanes
            stabilized by H1 , H2 . Let A, B ⊂ X be the projections of A, B.   Without loss of
            generality, we may assume that A is d-locally ﬁnite for all d. Let v be a base vertex
                    Choose a path ρ → X
            of N (A).                        starting at v and ending with an edge e dual to
              Let v, e be the projections of v, e to N (A), N (B). Then ρ projects to a path ρ
            B.


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          337


            that starts at v and ends with e. The elements of H1 H2 are represented by closed
            paths of the form αρβρ−1 , where α, β are closed paths in N (A), N (B) based at v
            and the endpoint of ρ. Let γ → X be a closed path based at v representing an
            element outside H1 H2 . We want to ﬁnd a ﬁnite cover X       of X, where the based lifts
            of γ and each path αρβρ−1 above have distinct endpoints. Equivalently, we want
            the based lift of γρ and each lift of ρ starting at the preimage of v in the based
            elevation of N (A) to end with edges dual to distinct elevations of B. Here a based
                                                                                               
            lift or elevation is a lift or elevation where v lifts to a speciﬁed basepoint of X.
                Suppose that ρ and γρ have length ≤ d. By Lemma 6.7 we can assume that A has
            injectivity radius > d. Then the quotient A+d = H1 \A     +d embeds into X. Since A is
            d-locally ﬁnite, there are ﬁnitely many hyperplanes in A+d . Applying Theorem 6.2
            to A+d , let A+d → R(A+d ) be the local isometry into the Salvetti complex R(A+d )
            of the right-angled Artin group with generators corresponding to hyperplanes in
            A+d . Apply Theorem 6.3 to the induced local isometry R(A+d ) → R(X). Consider
            its canonical completion R(X) → R(X) and the retraction R(X)     → R(A+d ). Take
                                                            
            the pullback of the cover R(X) → R(X) to X → X. We now verify that X             is the
            required cover.
                Let A⊂X    be an elevation of A mapping to R(A+d ) ⊂ R(X).   Let B,     B
                                                                                             ⊂ X 
                                                              
            be hyperplanes dual to the last edges e, e ⊂ A of lifts of ρ, γρ starting at some
                                                                +d
                               Since γ represents an element outside H1 H2 , the hyperplanes
            lifts of v in N (A).
            in X  dual to the last edges of any lifts of ρ, γρ starting at the H1 orbit of v
            are distinct. Hence the hyperplanes in A+d dual to the projections of e, e are
            distinct. Hence the projections of these hyperplanes to R(A+d ) are also distinct.
                              → R(A+d ) shows that hyperplanes TB , T ⊂ R(X)
            The retraction R(X)                                                     containing
                                                                                B
            these projections are also distinct. Since B, B map to TB , T , they are distinct as
                                                                             
                                                                              B
            well.                                                                                  

                 The proof of Lemma 6.10 also gives the following.

            Corollary 6.11. Let X be a special cube complex with ﬁnitely many codim-2-
            hyperplanes. Let A, B ⊂ X be hyperplanes, and let Q be a component of A ∩ B.
            There is a ﬁnite cover X → X with the following property. If elevations A,
                                                                                       B
                                                                                        ⊂X
                                                                                          
                                                               
            of A, B intersect along an elevation of Q, then A ∩ B projects entirely to Q.

            Proof. Choose a component Q of A ∩ B distinct from Q. Let e, e be edges in
            N (Q), N (Q ) dual to B. Note that e, e are dual to distinct hyperplanes in N (A).
            Consider closed paths γ = αβ, where α, β are paths in N (A), N (B) and moreover
            α starts with e and ends with e . We need to ﬁnd a cover X     where such paths γ
            do not lift. In other words, the extremal edges of any lift of α to X  are dual to
            distinct elevations of B.
               Since there are ﬁnitely many codim-2-hyperplanes in X, the carrier N (A) has
            ﬁnitely many hyperplanes. In other words, the hyperplane A is 0-locally ﬁnite. We
            repeat the construction from the proof of Lemma 6.10 with d = 0 to obtain the
                    Let A
            cover X.          ⊂X                                                   Then
                                   be an elevation of A mapping to R(N (A)) ⊂ R(X).
                                    are dual to distinct hyperplanes in X.
            any lifts of e, e to N (A)                                       Replacing X with
            a further cover that is a regular cover of X, we obtain the same property for all
            elevations of A.                                                                  


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            338                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE




                                                                               >2d




                                                                   Q                 Q′




                                 Figure 1. Double injectivity radius > d at Q = {Q, Q }

               When we have a map N (Q) → N (A), a path in N (A) starting (resp. ending) at
            a vertex v of N (Q) is a path that starts (resp. ends) at the image of v in N (A).
            Deﬁnition 6.12. Let A = B be hyperplanes in a cube complex X, and let Q be
            a family of components of A ∩ B. Hyperplanes A, B have double injectivity radius
            > d at Q if each path of length ≤ 2d in X starting at N (A) and ending at N (B)
            has the following property. Such a path is path-homotopic to a concatenation at
            a vertex of N (Q) of a pair of paths in N (A) and N (B). In particular A ∩ B = Q.
                                              N (B)
            In other words, if elevations N (A),     of N (A), N (B) to the universal cover of
            X are at distance ≤ 2d, then A  ∩B  is nonempty and projects to Q. We refer the
            reader to Figure 1.

            Lemma 6.13. Let X be a special cube complex with ﬁnitely many codim-2-hyper-
            planes. Let A, B ⊂ X be hyperplanes, and let Q be a component of A ∩ B. For each
                                      → X with the following property. If elevations A,
            d there is a ﬁnite cover X                                                 B⊂X  
            of A, B intersect along an elevation of Q, then they have double injectivity radius
            > d at the family of components of A∩B  projecting to Q.

              Note that this property is preserved when passing to further covers. In particular,
            we can arrange that it holds for all A, B and Q simultaneously.
            Proof. By Corollary 6.11 there is a ﬁnite cover X̌ of X where the intersection of
            some elevations Ǎ ∩ B̌ is nonempty and projects to Q. Then passing to a regular
            cover and quotienting by the group permuting the components of Ǎ∩ B̌, we obtain a
            cover X  of X with elevations A , B  of A, B such that the intersection Q = A ∩ B 
            is connected and projects to Q.
               If we ﬁnd a cover X  → X  satisfying the conclusion of the lemma with A , B  , Q
            in place of A, B, Q, then a regular cover X    of X factoring through X   will satisfy
            the conclusion of the lemma with A, B, Q. Thus we can replace X by X  , suppress
            the primes, and assume that A ∩ B = Q.
               Applying Theorem 6.2, let X → R be the local isometry into the Salvetti complex
            R = R(X) of a ﬁnitely generated right-angled Artin group F . Let TA , TB ⊂ R
            denote the hyperplanes that are the images of A, B, and let TQ ⊂ R denote the
            codim-2-hyperplane TA ∩ TB . Consider paths γ → R of length ≤ 2d starting at
            N (TA ) and ending at N (TB ) but with γ not path-homotopic to a concatenation at
            N (TQ ) of a pair of paths in N (TA ), N (TB ). Since R is compact, there are ﬁnitely


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          339


            many such paths γ. Let F denote the family of conjugacy classes of elements
            of F determined by the closed paths αβγ −1 , with α in N (TA ) and β in N (TB )
            concatenated at N (TQ ). Then F is a union of classes determined by ﬁnitely many
            nontrivial double cosets of the form H1 H2 g, where H1 = π1 TA , H2 = π1 TB . Since
            double cosets of hyperplane subgroups in F are separable (a case of Lemma 6.10
            proved in [HW08, Cor 9.4]), the group F has a ﬁnite index subgroup F disjoint
            from the set of elements whose classes lie in F. Let R    → R be the ﬁnite cover
            corresponding to F ⊂ F . Any intersecting elevations TA , TB ⊂ R
                                                                             of TA , TB have
                                                          
            double injectivity radius > d at TA ∩ TB . Let X → X be the pullback of R    → R.
               We show that X   has the desired property. Let A,
                                                                 B⊂X   be intersecting eleva-
            tions of A, B. Let A, B
                                    be their further elevations to the universal cover X of X
                                                     
            at distance ≤ 2d. The universal cover X embeds as a convex subcomplex of the
            universal cover R of R. The hyperplanes TA , TB ⊂ R  containing A, B
                                                                                     intersect,
            since their images TA , TB ⊂ R have double injectivity radius > d at TA ∩ TB . By
                                                                                
            Helly’s theorem [Rol98, Thm 2.2] the combinatorial convex hull of a pair points in
            intersecting hyperplanes contains an intersection point. Hence the hyperplanes A   
            and B intersect as well.                                                         

                                    7. Background on cubical small cancellation
               In this section we review the main theorem of cubical small cancellation [Wis17].
            It will be used in the proof of Theorem 2.4 (Specialization).

            7.1. Pieces. Let X be a nonpositively curved cube complex. Let {Yi → X}
            be a collection of local isometries of nonpositively curved cube complexes. The
            pair X|{Yi → X}, or brieﬂy X|Yi , is a cubical presentation. Its group is
            π1 X/ {π1 Yi } which equals π1 X ∗ , where X ∗ is obtained from X by attaching
            cones along the Yi . Let X = {π1 Yi }\X        denote the cover of X in the universal
            cover X     ∗ of X ∗ .
                 An abstract cone-piece in Yi of Yj is the intersection P = Yi ∩Yj of some elevations
            Yi , Yj of Yi , Yj to the universal cover X
                                                          of X. In the case where j = i, we require
            that the elevations are distinct in the sense that for the projections P → Yi , Yj
            there is no automorphism Yi → Yj such that the following diagram commutes.
                                                                       P       → Yi
                                                                       ↓        ↓
                                                                       Yj      → X

            Note that an abstract cone-piece in Yi actually lies in Yi .
                Let A be a hyperplane in X     disjoint from Yi . An abstract wall-piece in Yi is the
                                     
            intersection Yi ∩ N (A). An abstract piece is an abstract cone-piece or an abstract
            wall-piece.
                A path α → Yi is a piece in Yi if it lifts to Yi into an abstract piece in Yi . We
            then denote by |α|Yi the combinatorial distance between the endpoints of a lift of
            α to Yi , i.e., the length of a geodesic path in Yi path-homotopic to α.
                The cubical presentation X|Yi  satisﬁes the C  ( n1 ) small cancellation condition
            if |α|Yi < n1 ||Yi || for each piece α in Yi . Recall that ||Yi || denotes the minimum of
            the lengths of essential closed paths in Yi .


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            340                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


            7.2. Ladder Theorem. A disc diagram D is a compact contractible 2-complex
            with a ﬁxed embedding in R2 . Its boundary path ∂p D is the attaching map of
            the cell at ∞. The diagram is spurless if D does not have a spur, i.e., a vertex
            contained in only one edge. If X is a combinatorial complex, a disc diagram in X
            is a combinatorial map of a disc diagram into X.
               Let D → X    ∗ be a disc diagram with a boundary path ∂p D → X. Note that
                            ∗ are squares or triangles, where the latter have exactly one vertex
            the 2-cells of X
            at a cone-point. The triangles in D are grouped together into cone-cells around
            these cone-points. The complexity of D is the pair of numbers (# cone-cells of D,
            # squares of D) with lexicographic order.
               In addition to spurs, there are two other types of positive curvature features in
            ∂p D: shells and cornsquares. A cone-cell C adjacent to ∂p D is a shell if ∂C ∩ ∂p D
            (outer path) is connected and its complement in ∂C (inner path) is a concatenation
            of ≤ 6 pieces. A pair of consecutive edges of ∂p D is a cornsquare if the carriers of
            their dual hyperplanes intersect at a square and surround a square subdiagram, i.e.,
            a subdiagram all of whose 2-cells are squares. A ladder is a disc diagram that is the
            concatenation of cone-cells and rectangles with cone-cells or spurs at extremities,
            as in Figure 2. A single cone-cell is not a ladder, while a single edge is a ladder.
            The following summarizes the main results of cubical small cancellation theory.
            Theorem 7.1 ([Wis17, Thm 3.45], see also [Jan17]). Assume that X|Yi  satisﬁes
            the C  ( 12
                      1
                         ) small cancellation condition. Let D → X  ∗ be a minimal complexity disc
            diagram for a closed path ∂p D → X. Then one of the following holds:
                (a) D is a single vertex or a single cone-cell;
                (b) D is a ladder; or
                (c) D has at least three spurs and/or shells and/or cornsquares. Moreover, if
                       there is no shell or spur, then there must be at least four cornsquares.
                  The following consequence allows us to identify Yi with any of its lifts to X.
            Corollary 7.2. Let X|Yi  satisfy the C  ( 12
                                                        1
                                                           ) small cancellation condition. Then
            each Yi lifts to an embedding in X.
            Proof. We argue by contradiction. Let γ → Yi be a path of minimal length that is
            not a closed path but which projects to a closed path γ → X. Let v be the vertex
            of γ which is the projection of the endpoints of γ. Let D → X  ∗ be a disc diagram
            with ∂p D = γ of minimal complexity among all such paths γ. Then the boundary
            ∂C of any cone-cell C in D is essential in Yj into which it maps.




                          Figure 2. Two ladders are on the left. On the right are two
                          cornsquares, a spur, and a shell within a disc diagram.


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          341


                If in γ − v, there were two consecutive edges forming a cornsquare, we could
            homotope D so that there is a square at that exact corner [Wis17, Lem 2.6]. That
            square would lift to Yi , and we could homotope γ through it to reduce the com-
            plexity. The diagram D has no spur. If there is a shell C in D whose outer path
            is contained in γ − v, then let γC = γ ∩ ∂C denote that outer path and suppose
            that ∂C maps to Yj . If γC is a piece in Yj of Yi , then this contradicts that ∂C is
            essential in Yi . Otherwise j = i, and there is an identiﬁcation Yj → Yi agreeing on
            γC . We then replace inside γ the outer path γC by the inner path of C to obtain
            γ  → Yi with the same endpoints as γ. The projection γ  → X of γ  bounds the
            disc diagram D − C of smaller complexity than D, which is a contradiction. Hence
            by Theorem 7.1, the diagram D is a single cone-cell C. Since ∂C is essential, the
            path γ − v is not a piece, hence again we can identify Yj with Yi along γ − v and
            γ. But γ − v is a closed path in Yj , a contradiction.                             
            7.3. Small cancellation quotients. We now prove that in small cancellation quo-
            tients we can separate elements from cosets and double cosets. We also prove a
            convexity result for carriers.
            Lemma 7.3. Let X|Yi  be a cubical presentation with all abstract pieces of uni-
            formly bounded diameter. Suppose that each Yi is virtually special with ﬁnitely
            many immersed hyperplanes. Let A    ⊂X    be a hyperplane, and let g ∈ G − H, where
                                       
            G = π1 X and H = Stab(A). Then there are ﬁnite index subgroups Pi ⊂ Pi = π1 Yi
            such that the following hold.
                (1) Letting X = {Pi }\X, the immersed hyperplane A in X that is the pro-
                                has no self-intersections and no self-osculations.
                    jection of A
                (2) Any two vertices of N (A) are connected by a geodesic that lies in the union
                    of
                       • a uniform neighborhood of N (A), and
                       • the translates of Y i = Pi \Yi in X intersecting A.
                (3) g ∈/ H in the quotient G = G/ {Pi }.
            Proof. Assume that all the abstract pieces have diameter < d. By Lemma 6.4 we
            can choose Pi so that ||Y i || ≥ 12d. By Lemma 6.7 we can further choose Pi so that
            all the hyperplanes of Y i have injectivity radius > 3d. We also require that Pi ⊂ Pi
            are characteristic, so that X|Y i  satisﬁes the C  ( 12
                                                                   1
                                                                      ) small cancellation condition.
                                                  
            Note that merely requiring that Pi is normal in Pi might not suﬃce, since we need
            that every automorphism of Yi respecting the map Yi → X elevates to Y i , thus
            ensuring that in Yi there do not appear new abstract cone-pieces in Y i of Y i .
                We ﬁrst prove Assertion (2). Let D → X       ∗ be a disc diagram bounded by a
            geodesic α in the 1-skeleton of N (A) and a geodesic γ in the 1-skeleton of X.
            We assume that D has minimal complexity among all such disc diagrams with
            prescribed common endpoints of α and γ. Then the boundary ∂C of any cone-cell
            C in D is essential in Y i into which it maps. Hence |∂C|Y i ≥ ||Y i || ≥ 12d, where
            |∂C|Y i denotes the minimal length of a closed path in the free homotopy class of
            ∂C in Y i . Consequently, since the inner path of a shell C is a concatenation of at
            most 6 pieces, a geodesic in Y i that is path-homotopic to the inner path of C is
            shorter than the outer path of C.
                If in ∂p D = αγ there are two consecutive edges forming a cornsquare, they
            cannot both lie in α or both lie in γ. Otherwise we could homotope D so that there


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            342                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


            is a square at that exact corner [Wis17, Lem 2.6]. Then we could homotope α or γ
            through that square to reduce the complexity. The diagram D has no spur except
            possibly where α and γ are concatenated. If there is a shell C in D whose outer
            path is contained in γ, then replacing the outer path of C by a geodesic that is
            path-homotopic to the inner path of C contradicts that γ is a geodesic.
                Finally, suppose that the outer path of a shell C is contained in α. Let αC =
            ∂C ∩ α denote the outer path of C, and let δ denote the inner path of C. Let Yi
            denote the universal cover of Y i into which ∂C maps. Consider the copy of Yi in
            X that contains a lift of α to N (A).    If A  is disjoint from Yi , then α is a piece
                                             C                                              C
            and ∂C is a concatenation of at most 7 pieces, which contradicts |∂C|Y i ≥ 12d.
            Otherwise let A  i = A  ∩ Yi . Hence α projects into the quotient N (Ai ) of N (A  i ) in
                                                     C
            Y i . Since the injectivity radius of the hyperplane Ai in Y i is > 3d, the inner path
                                                                                      
            δ is path-homotopic in Y i to a path αC      in N (Ai ). If we choose αC     to be geodesic,
                                                                                     
            then since it is path-homotopic to the inner path δ, we have |αC | = |δ|Y i < |αC |.
            This contradicts that α is a geodesic in N (A).
                Thus there can be at most two spurs and/or shells and/or cornsquares in D,
            and these are located where α and γ are concatenated. By Theorem 7.1 the disc
            diagram D is a single cone-cell or ladder. For any of its cone-cells C let αC =
            α ∩ ∂C, γC = γ ∩ ∂C. Let λC , δC denote the remaining, possibly trivial, arcs of
            ∂C. Since λC , δC are pieces, we have |λC |Y i < d and |δC |Y i < d, where ∂C maps
            to Y i . As before, if A   is disjoint from Yi containing a lift of α to N (A),    then
                                                                                       C
            αC is a piece. Since |∂C|Y i ≥ 12d, this contradicts that γC is a geodesic. Hence
            A intersects Yi , as required in Assertion (2). Furthermore, if D is a ladder, then
            each subpath γo of γ outside the cone-cells of D has endpoints at distance ≤ d from
            N (A), and the rectangle that γo bounds in D shows that γo is contained in the
            d-neighborhood of N (A). This ﬁnishes the proof of Assertion (2).
                For Assertion (3), let A be the immersed hyperplane in X that is the projection
            of A. Let γ → X be a minimal length path starting and ending at N (A) such that
            a concatenation of γ with a path in N (A) represents the conjugacy class of g. We
            increase d so that d ≥ |γ|, and we then choose Pi as before. If g lies in H, then
            a lift of γ to X forms a closed path with a path α in N (A). Let D be a minimal
            complexity disc diagram with ∂p D = αγ among all such γ. Then D cannot have
            spurs by the minimality of |γ|. As before, there are no consecutive edges forming
            cornsquares in α or in γ. Since d ≥ |γ|, there are no shells with outer path in γ.



                                                                γ                                              γ


                                                        δ                                        δ
                                                            C                                        C ′ αC′

                                                         αC




                          Figure 3. The shell C is surrounded by a hyperplane and a short
                          inner path δ. We can thus replace C by a square diagram C  as on
                          the right.


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          343


                If there is a shell C with outer path αC = α ∩ ∂C, then as before the inner path
                                                      
            δ is path-homotopic in Y i to a path αC       in N (Ai ). Then as in Figure 3, we could
                               
            replace αC by αC and replace C by a square diagram. This contradicts the minimal
            complexity of D.
                By Theorem 7.1 the disc diagram D is a single cone-cell or a ladder, and for
            any of its cone-cells C the hyperplane A     intersects Yi containing the lift of α to
                                                                                                 C
                 
            N (A). We have |λC |Y i + |γC | + |δC |Y i ≤ 3d, while the injectivity radius in Y i of
            the projection of the hyperplane A   i = A  ∩ Yi is > 3d. Then we can replace α by
                                                                                                 C
              
            αC and replace C by a square diagram to contradict the minimal complexity of D.
                Assertion (1) follows from the same proof as Assertion (3), where we consider
            all paths γ of length 0.                                                               
            Lemma 7.4. Let X|Yi  be a cubical presentation with all abstract pieces of uni-
            formly bounded diameter. Suppose that each Yi is virtually special with ﬁnitely
            many immersed codim-2-hyperplanes. Let H1 , H2 ⊂ G = π1 X be stabilizers of in-
                                    B
            tersecting hyperplanes A,  ⊂ X,
                                            and let g ∈ G − H1 H2 . There are ﬁnite index
                        
                                                  / H 1 H 2 in the quotient G = G/ {Pi }.
            subgroups Pi ⊂ Pi = π1 Yi such that g ∈
            Proof. Assume that all the abstract pieces have diameter < d. Let Q        =A  ∩ B,
                                                                                                and
            let A, B, Q be the immersed hyperplanes and codim-2-hyperplane in X that are the
            projections of A,   B,
                                   Q.
                                      Let γ → X be a minimal length path starting at N (A) and
            ending at N (B) such that its concatenation with a pair of paths in N (A), N (B)
            concatenated at N (Q) represents the conjugacy class of g. We increase d so that
            d ≥ |γ|. Let Pisp ⊂ Pi be ﬁnite index special subgroups.
                By Lemmas 6.4, 6.7, and 6.13 we can choose ﬁnite index subgroups Pi ⊂ Pisp
            that are characteristic in Pi and such that Y i = Pi \Yi satisfy the following:
                   • ||Y i || ≥ 12d;
                   • all hyperplanes in Y i have injectivity radius > 4d; and
                   • all pairs Ai , B i of hyperplanes in Y i intersecting at a codim-2-hyperplane Qi
                     have double injectivity radius > 3d at the family of components of Ai ∩ B i
                     in the Pisp /Pi orbit of Qi .
                The reason we used the Pisp /Pi orbit instead of the entire Pi /Pi orbit is the
            following. Since Pisp is special, an element p ∈ Pisp /Pi cannot map Ai to a distinct
            hyperplane intersecting Ai . Hence if p ∈ Pisp /Pi maps a component of Ai ∩ B i to
            a component of Ai ∩ B i , then it cannot interchange Ai and B i , and so it stabilizes
            Ai and B i .
                Let X = {Pi }\X.    Let A, B, Q be the hyperplanes and codim-2-hyperplane
            in X that are the projections of A,    B,
                                                      Q.
                                                        
                We now argue by contradiction to prove the lemma. If g lies in H 1 H 2 , then there
            is a disc diagram D → X      ∗ bounded by a closed path αγβ −1 , where α, β −1 are paths
            in N (A), N (B) concatenated at a vertex v ∈ N (Q), and we lift γ to X. Assume
            that D has minimal complexity among all such diagrams and γ. By minimality of
            |γ| the diagram D has no spurs except possibly where α and β are concatenated. By
            replacing v, we can remove such spurs and assume that D is spurless. The diagram
            D also cannot have two consecutive edges of α, β, or γ forming cornsquares.
                An outer path of a shell C cannot be contained entirely in α, β, or γ, as in the
            proof of Lemma 7.3. We now prove that the outer path of a shell C with ∂C
            mapping to Y i cannot be contained in αγ (or γβ −1 ). Otherwise, recall that |γ| ≤ d


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            344                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE



                            β                                                                                        β′
               βC
                                             γ                                                               βC′               γ
                  C δ                                   C δ
               αC               α                                                                              αC′        α′


                          Figure 4. The shell C in the ﬁrst diagram is surrounded by two
                          hyperplanes and a short inner path δ as in the second diagram.
                                                                                     −1
                          We can thus replace C by a square diagram bounded by αC   δβC
                          to obtain a smaller complexity diagram on the right.



            and the length of a geodesic that is path-homotopic to the inner path of C is < 6d.
            Hence if αC = ∂C ∩ α is a piece, then this contradicts |∂C|Y i ≥ 12d. If αC is not a
            piece, then since the hyperplane injectivity radius in Y i is > 4d, we could replace
                     
            αC by αC   and replace C by a square diagram, contradicting minimal complexity.
               Since X|Y i  satisﬁes the C  ( 12
                                                1
                                                   ) small cancellation condition, by Theorem 7.1
            the disc diagram D is either:
                  (a) a single cone-cell C; or
                  (b) a ladder with a shell C containing v; or
                  (c) a diagram with two cornsquares located where γ is concatenated with α
                      and β, and with a shell C containing v as in Figure 4.
            In each case there is a cone-cell C containing v. Let αC and βC denote the subpaths
                                                                            −1
            α ∩ ∂C and β ∩ ∂C. The complement δ in ∂C of βC                      αC either coincides with γ in
            case (a), is a piece in case (b), or is an inner path of a shell, hence a concatenation
            of at most 6 pieces in case (c). In each case we have |δ|Y i < 6d, where ∂C maps to
            Y i.
               Let v ∈ N (Q)    be a lift of v. Let Yi be the elevation of Yi containing v. Let
                            
            Ai = A ∩ Yi , Bi = B        ∩ Yi . If both A i , B
                                                                i are empty, then both α , β are pieces
                                                                                               C   C
            which contradicts |∂C|Y i > 12d. If exactly one of A            i , Bi is empty, say Bi , then β
                                                                                                                C
            is a piece. Since the injectivity radius of A            i is > 4d, as before we could replace
                     
            αC by αC     and replace C by a square diagram, contradicting minimal complexity.
            Hence both A           i are nonempty and D shows that they intersect in nonempty
                              i , B
            Qi = Q ∩ Yi .
               Let Ai , B i , Qi ⊂ Y i denote the projections of A         i , B
                                                                                i , Q
                                                                                     i . The double injectivity
            radius in Y i is > 3d. Hence δ is homotopic in Y i to a concatenation at pN (Qi )
                               
            of paths αC     , βC    in N (Ai ), N (B i ) for some p ∈ Pisp /Pi . Thus there is in Y i a
                                                              −1
            square diagram with boundary αC               δβ  C . We replace C by this square diagram,
                                                                   
            and we replace the subpath αC of α by αC                  to obtain α , and similarly we replace
            the subpath βC of β by βC to obtain β . Since p ∈ Pisp /Pi , we have pN (Ai ) =
                                                                

            N (Ai ) and pN (B i ) = N (B i ). Translating the whole diagram by p−1 yields a
            disc diagram bounded by p−1 (α )p−1 (γ)p−1 (β −1 ), where p−1 (α ), p−1 (β −1 ) are
            paths in N (A), N (B) concatenated at N (Q). This diagram has a smaller number
            of cone-cells than D, which contradicts the minimal complexity assumption. See
            Figure 4.                                                                                          


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                          345


                                                                8. Specialization
                 In this section we prove Theorem 2.4 (Specialization).


            Proof of Theorem 2.4. To prove that the action of G on X    is virtually special, we
            will verify the conditions of Criterion 2.3. Freeness and ﬁniteness Conditions (1)–
            (3) of Criterion 2.3 are Hypothesis (i) of Theorem 2.4. We now verify Condition (4).
            Let H be the stabilizer of a hyperplane A   ⊂ X.
                                                            Let g ∈ G − H. We will ﬁnd ﬁnite
                                 
            index subgroups Pi ⊂ Pi such that:
                  (a) G = G/ {Pi } is hyperbolic and virtually compact special;
                  (b) the image H is quasiconvex in G;
                  (c) g ∈
                        / H.
            The result then follows from separability of quasiconvex subgroups in hyperbolic
            virtually compact special groups [HW08, Thm 7.3].
                By Hypothesis (iv) and Theorem 4.7, there are En◦ ⊂ En such that Pi ∩En ⊂ En◦
            implies that G splits as a graph of hyperbolic virtually compact special groups with
            ﬁnite edge groups. Then G is hyperbolic virtually compact special and Condi-
            tion (a) is satisﬁed. By Hypothesis (ii), there are indeed ﬁnite index subgroups
            Pi ⊂ Pi satisfying Pi ∩ En ⊂ En◦ .
                To arrange Conditions (b) and (c) we apply cubical small cancelation theory.
            Let X = G\X,     and let Yi = Pi \Yi . Consider the cubical presentation X|Yi .
            By Hypothesis (iii), the complexes Yi are virtually special and have ﬁnitely many
            immersed codim-2-hyperplanes. Since Yi are superconvex, there is a uniform bound
            on the diameters of abstract wall-pieces. Let K ⊂ X     be the compact subcomplex
            from the deﬁnition of relative cocompactness. If j = i or g  = Pi , then g  Yi ∩ Yj ⊂
            GK. Since G is relatively hyperbolic, the intersections g  Pi g −1 ∩ Pj are ﬁnite, and
            hence there is a uniform bound on the diameters of abstract cone-pieces g  Yi ∩ Yj .
                We can thus apply Lemma 7.3 and replace Pi by further ﬁnite index subgroups
            satisfying its conclusion. Condition (c) follows directly from Lemma 7.3(3). Let A
            be the hyperplane in X that is the projection of A,  as in Lemma 7.3(1). The group
                                                 
            G acts cocompactly on X c = {Pi }\GK. We can assume that X c is connected
            and contains an edge dual to A. We will prove that A ∩ X c is quasiconvex in X c ,
            which means that its stabilizer H is quasiconvex in G, giving Condition (b). By
            Lemma 7.3(2), any two points of N (A) ∩ X c are connected in X by a geodesic γ
            that lies in the union of a uniform neighborhood of N (A) and the translates of Y i
            intersecting A. Every component of γ − X c is contained in some translate of the
            closure Zi of Y i − X c . By the last part of the deﬁnition of relative cocompactness
            in Section 2, the group Pi acts cocompactly on Yi ∩ GK. Thus, since Pi is of
            ﬁnite index in Pi , the intersection Zi ∩ X c is compact. Hence we can form a quasi-
            geodesic γc by replacing in γ each component of γ − X c in a translate g  Zi by a
            path of uniformly bounded length in g  Y i ∩ X c . The quasi-geodesic γc is contained
            in the union of a uniform neighborhood of N (A) and the translates of Y i ∩ X c
            intersecting A. Since Y i ∩ X c are uniformly bounded, γc is at uniform distance
            from A, as desired. This completes the proof of Condition (4) of Criterion 2.3.
                To prove Condition (5) we need to replace (c) above by
                  (c ) g ∈
                          / H 1H 2,


Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
            346                                          P. PRZYTYCKI AND D. T. WISE


                                                                          1 , A
            where H1 , H2 are the stabilizers of intersecting hyperplanes A    2 ⊂ X
                                                                                     and g ∈
            G − H1 H2 . It suﬃces to consider Pi provided by Lemma 7.4. Once we have
            (a), (b), and (c ), we appeal to [Min06, Thm 1.1], which says that in hyperbolic
            groups with separable quasiconvex subgroups, double cosets of quasiconvex sub-
            groups are separable as well.                                                   

                                                               Acknowledgments
               We thank Stefan Friedl for his remarks and corrections. We also thank the
            referee for detailed comments that helped us clarify the proof.

                                                                     References
            [Ago04] Ian Agol, Tameness of hyperbolic 3-manifolds (2004), available at arXix:GT/0405568.
            [Ago08] Ian Agol, Criteria for virtual ﬁbering, J. Topol. 1 (2008), no. 2, 269–284, DOI
                    10.1112/jtopol/jtn003. MR2399130
            [Ago13] Ian Agol, The virtual Haken conjecture, Doc. Math. 18 (2013), 1045–1087. With an appendix
                    by Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Manning. MR3104553
            [AFW15] Matthias Aschenbrenner, Stefan Friedl, and Henry Wilton, 3-manifold groups, EMS Series of
                    Lectures in Mathematics, European Mathematical Society (EMS), Zürich, 2015. MR3444187
            [BW13] Hadi Bigdely and Daniel T. Wise, Quasiconvexity and relatively hyperbolic groups that split,
                    Michigan Math. J. 62 (2013), no. 2, 387–406, DOI 10.1307/mmj/1370870378. MR3079269
            [Bon86] Francis Bonahon, Bouts des variétés hyperboliques de dimension 3 (French), Ann. of Math.
                    (2) 124 (1986), no. 1, 71–158, DOI 10.2307/1971388. MR847953
            [Bon02] Francis Bonahon, Geometric structures on 3-manifolds, Handbook of Geometric Topology,
                    North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2002, pp. 93–164. MR1886669
            [Bri01] Martin R. Bridson, On the subgroups of semihyperbolic groups, Essays on geometry and
                    related topics, Vol. 1, 2, Monogr. Enseign. Math., vol. 38, Enseignement Math., Geneva,
                    2001, pp. 85–111. MR1929323
            [CG06]  Danny Calegari and David Gabai, Shrinkwrapping and the taming of hyperbolic 3-manifolds,
                    J. Amer. Math. Soc. 19 (2006), no. 2, 385–446, DOI 10.1090/S0894-0347-05-00513-8.
                    MR2188131
            [Can96] Richard D. Canary, A covering theorem for hyperbolic 3-manifolds and its applications,
                    Topology 35 (1996), no. 3, 751–778, DOI 10.1016/0040-9383(94)00055-7. MR1396777
            [CLR97] D. Cooper, D. D. Long, and A. W. Reid, Essential closed surfaces in bounded 3-manifolds,
                    J. Amer. Math. Soc. 10 (1997), no. 3, 553–563, DOI 10.1090/S0894-0347-97-00236-1.
                    MR1431827
            [DJ00]  Michael W. Davis and Tadeusz Januszkiewicz, Right-angled Artin groups are commensurable
                    with right-angled Coxeter groups, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 153 (2000), no. 3, 229–235, DOI
                    10.1016/S0022-4049(99)00175-9. MR1783167
            [GP16]  Victor Gerasimov and Leonid Potyagailo, Quasiconvexity in relatively hyperbolic groups, J.
                    Reine Angew. Math. 710 (2016), 95–135, DOI 10.1515/crelle-2015-0029. MR3437561
            [HW08] Frédéric Haglund and Daniel T. Wise, Special cube complexes, Geom. Funct. Anal. 17 (2008),
                    no. 5, 1551–1620, DOI 10.1007/s00039-007-0629-4. MR2377497
            [HW10] Frédéric Haglund and Daniel T. Wise, Coxeter groups are virtually special, Adv. Math. 224
                    (2010), no. 5, 1890–1903, DOI 10.1016/j.aim.2010.01.011. MR2646113
            [Ham01] Emily Hamilton, Abelian subgroup separability of Haken 3-manifolds and closed hy-
                    perbolic n-orbifolds, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 83 (2001), no. 3, 626–646, DOI
                    10.1112/plms/83.3.626. MR1851085
            [Hru10] G. Christopher Hruska, Relative hyperbolicity and relative quasiconvexity for countable
                    groups, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 10 (2010), no. 3, 1807–1856, DOI 10.2140/agt.2010.10.1807.
                    MR2684983
            [HW14] G. C. Hruska and Daniel T. Wise, Finiteness properties of cubulated groups, Compos. Math.
                    150 (2014), no. 3, 453–506, DOI 10.1112/S0010437X13007112. MR3187627
            [HW99] Tim Hsu and Daniel T. Wise, On linear and residual properties of graph products, Michigan
                    Math. J. 46 (1999), no. 2, 251–259, DOI 10.1307/mmj/1030132408. MR1704150
            [Jan17] Kasia Jankiewicz, The fundamental theorem of cubical small cancellation theory, Trans.
                    Amer. Math. Soc. 369 (2017), no. 6, 4311–4346, DOI 10.1090/tran/6852. MR3624411
            [Kap01] Michael Kapovich, Hyperbolic manifolds and discrete groups, Progress in Mathematics,
                    vol. 183, Birkhäuser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 2001. MR1792613
            [KM04] P. B. Kronheimer and T. S. Mrowka, Dehn surgery, the fundamental group and SU(2), Math.
                    Res. Lett. 11 (2004), no. 5-6, 741–754, DOI 10.4310/MRL.2004.v11.n6.a3. MR2106239
            [Lee95] Bernhard Leeb, 3-manifolds with(out) metrics of nonpositive curvature, Invent. Math. 122
                    (1995), no. 2, 277–289, DOI 10.1007/BF01231445. MR1358977
            [Liu13] Yi Liu, Virtual cubulation of nonpositively curved graph manifolds, J. Topol. 6 (2013), no. 4,
                    793–822, DOI 10.1112/jtopol/jtt010. MR3145140
            [MP09]  Eduardo Martı́nez-Pedroza, Combination of quasiconvex subgroups of relatively hyperbolic
                    groups, Groups Geom. Dyn. 3 (2009), no. 2, 317–342, DOI 10.4171/GGD/59. MR2486802




Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
                                            MIXED 3-MANIFOLDS ARE VIRTUALLY SPECIAL                             347


            [Min06]       Ashot Minasyan, Separable subsets of GFERF negatively curved groups, J. Algebra 304
                          (2006), no. 2, 1090–1100, DOI 10.1016/j.jalgebra.2006.03.050. MR2264291
            [PW14]        Piotr Przytycki and Daniel T. Wise, Graph manifolds with boundary are virtually special,
                          J. Topol. 7 (2014), no. 2, 419–435, DOI 10.1112/jtopol/jtt009. MR3217626
            [Rol98]       Martin Roller, Poc sets, median algebras, and group actions. An extended study of Dun-
                          woody’s construction and Sageev’s theorem. (1998), available at www.personal.soton.ac.uk/
                          gan/Roller.pdf.
            [RW98]        J. Hyam Rubinstein and Shicheng Wang, π1 -injective surfaces in graph manifolds, Comment.
                          Math. Helv. 73 (1998), no. 4, 499–515, DOI 10.1007/s000140050066. MR1639876
            [Thu80]       William P. Thurston, The Geometry and Topology of Three-Manifolds (1980), Princeton
                          University course notes, available at http://www.msri.org/publications/books/gt3m/.
            [Thu86]       William P. Thurston, A norm for the homology of 3-manifolds, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 59
                          (1986), no. 339, i–vi and 99–130. MR823443
            [Wis12]       Daniel T. Wise, From riches to raags: 3-manifolds, right-angled Artin groups, and cubical
                          geometry, CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics, vol. 117, Published for the Con-
                          ference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, Washington, DC; by the American Mathematical
                          Society, Providence, RI, 2012. MR2986461
            [Wis17]       Daniel T. Wise, The structure of groups with quasiconvex hierarchy, Ann. of Math. Stud. to
                          appear.

                                                                    ´
              Institute of Mathematics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Sniadeckich 8, 00-656 Warsaw,
            Poland; and Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University, Montreal,
            Quebec, Canada H3A 0B9
              E-mail address: piotr.przytycki@mcgill.ca

              Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
            Canada H3A 0B9
              E-mail address: wise@math.mcgill.ca




Licensed to McGill Univ. Prepared on Tue Aug 7 13:37:46 EDT 2018 for download from IP 132.206.150.239.
License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/journal-terms-of-use
