    Astérisque

L EONARD L. S COTT
Defect groups and the isomorphism problem
Astérisque, tome 181-182 (1990), p. 257-262
<http://www.numdam.org/item?id=AST_1990__181-182__257_0>




    © Société mathématique de France, 1990, tous droits réservés.
    L’accès aux archives de la collection « Astérisque » (http://smf4.emath.fr/
    Publications/Asterisque/) implique l’accord avec les conditions générales d’uti-
    lisation (http://www.numdam.org/conditions). Toute utilisation commerciale ou
    impression systématique est constitutive d’une infraction pénale. Toute copie
    ou impression de ce fichier doit contenir la présente mention de copyright.




                      Article numérisé dans le cadre du programme
                    Numérisation de documents anciens mathématiques
                                 http://www.numdam.org/
                 DEFECT GROUPS AND THE ISOMORPHISM PROBLEM


                                     by Leonard L. Scott1




  ABSTRACT As a ring, a block may arise from more than one finite group. The resulting
  conjugacy issue for defect groups is important for the group ring isomorphism problem and
  for understanding block theory in general. There are even indirect structural consequences
  for finite groups, through G. Robinson's work on the "Z—star theorem" for odd primes. A
  positive answer to the defect group conjugacy problem is given here for the principal block
  in the case of cyclic, T.I., Sylow p-subgroups.



         In a talk at Areata [S] I raised the following question regarding defect groups: Let
  B be a block of group rings ZpG and 2pH, where Zp denotes the ring of p—adic integers
  and G, H are (possibly nonisomorphic) finite groups. Suppose B has defect group D in G
  and E in H.    Identify D and E with their projections on B. Is it then true that, after
  applying some suitable normalization process to D and E (preserving their isomorphism
  types), these groups must then be conjugate by a unit of B? In case B is a principal block,
  normalization should just be the familiar and innocuous projection onto the units of
  augmentation 1, using an augmentation B -> S obtained, say, from the sum-of-coefficients
  map SG -» S. For other blocks the correct formulation of normalization remains part of the
  problem.




  ^This research was supported in part by NSF, especially NSF—INT.


S.M.F.
Astérisque   181-182   (1990)



                                               257
                                        L.L.   SCOTT




       As Alperin has observed, a weaker version of the question is simply to ask if the
block determines the defect group up to isomorphism.        This allows the question to be
meaningfully investigated over modular fields (and also, we note here, for Morita or
derived equivalent blocks, though it remains reasonable in all these cases to hope also for a
version describing more explicitly how the isomorphism takes place). C. Bessenrodt has
obtained a number of interesting results in the modular context, as discussed at this
conference.   However, for intended later applications to the ismorphism problem — Does
ZG ~ ZH imply G is isomorphic to H? — I have focused on the version stated above. Let
me also mention that both Roggenkamp and Weiss have expressed the view that the
question might be formulated even more strongly, in terms of p—groups that should be
conjugate to a subgroup of the defect group.
       In this note I wish to present the following theorem, including a somewhat
condensed proof.    The statement is an improvement over the result presented at this
Luminy conference, in that I do not need to assume E is the image of D under an
automorphism of D. The argument, however, is essentially the same.


Theorem Let S be an unramified (and integrally closed) finite extension of TL^.     Let B be
the principal block of group algebras SG, SH over S, for finite groups G and H. Let D and
E be Svlow p—subgroups of G and H, respectively, and identify them with their projections
onto B. Assume that E is normalized in the sense of mapping to 1 under the augmentation
B -> S induced bv SG -» S (which certainly also sends D to 1).
       Assume also that D is cyclic (which implies that E is cyclic), and that D and E are
T.I. sets in G and H, respectively. Then D is conjugate to E in B.


       Since every finite simple group appears to have a cyclic T.I. set Sylow subgroup for
some prime p, I am hopeful that even this basic case might have an impact on the




                                               258
                  DEFECT GROUPS AND THE ISOMORPHISM               PROBLEM




isomorphism problem for nonsolvable groups. In the solvable (or just p—constrained) case,
Roggenkamp and I have proved that, if the Z-forms 2G/Op,(G) and ZH/Op,(H) for a
principal block B agree, then any defect (Sylow) groups D for G and E for H, normalized in
B as above, are conjugate by a unit of B. Indeed, the normalized projections of G and H
on B are conjugate in this case [S]. The equality over I (rather than Zp) is only needed to
insure, in the case Op,(G) = 1, that Op(H) maps to 1 in 2pG/Op(G). Roggenkamp and I
would very much like to know if this already follows, if H is a group of augmentation 1
units which is a Zp—basis in ZpG. Perhaps someone reading this article may be able to
answer this question.
       I would like to mention that the first version of the above theorem, the defect 1 case
with E the image of D under an automorphism, was obtained in collaboration with
Roggenkamp, using his explicit determinations [Ro] of the blocks involved as orders. Of
course, the first positive answer to any kind of defect group conjugacy question was the
p-group case Roggenkamp and I treated in [RS].


       One ingredient in the proof of the above theorem is the following lemma, which I
                                                         *
found while thinking about work of G. Robinson on the Z theorem for primes p>5; the
latter would follow from results of Robinson and a positive answer to the defect group
conjugacy question for principal blocks [R].
Lemma Let S be a complete p—adic domain or its residue field. Suppose B is a block of
both SG and SH for finite groups G and H, for which B has defect groups D and E,
respectively. Assume that B has trivial source as an SG x H—module. Let e € Cg(D) be a
source idempotent (in the sense of Puig [P]) for B with respect to D and G, and f e Cg(E)
a source idempotent for B with respect to E and H.
       Then eD is conjugate bv a unit of B to fE. In particular, e is conjugate to f, and D
is isomorphic to E.




                                               259
                                        L.L. SCOTT




       Briefly, the proof is as follows: First one shows that Be is an indecomposable SH x D
module with vertex V a diagonal copy of D in E x D . (Note Be is projective on both sides,
while its restriction to V contains a trivial summand.     Thus V is diagonal.   If W is its
projection onto D, then Be is projective relative to H x W , thus projective relative to B®SW
and G x W . It follows that W = D, since e is a source idempotent.) Symmetry now gives
an isomorphism of E with D, which may be used to make Be an SHxE—module. As such,
it has trivial source and vertex the standard diagonal of E. Hence it is a direct summand
of the bimodule SH, so must be isomorphic to Bf' for some primitive idempotent f' of the
centralizer in B of E. Examination of this isomorphism gives a conjugation of f ' E to eD.
It can now be concluded that the idempotent V has defect group E, and is thus conjugate
to f by a unit of B normalizing E, completing the proof.

       Broue noted at the conference that he has encountered similar hypotheses in his
work on fusion—compatible isometries, except that he uses the "endo—permutation11, rather
than the "trivial source" condition (and a "diagonal" hypothesis on the vertex of his
Morita equivalence module, the analogue of B). The "endo—permutation" condition would
at least suffice in the beginning of the argument above, replacing Be by Endg(Be).
       Intellectual predecessors of the above argument include Ward [Wa] and Coleman
[C], which concern fusion and automorphisms of p—subgroups of unit groups of group rings,
and more modern observations of Puig dealing similarly with source algebras.            I am
grateful to R. Sandling for pointing out to me the results in Ward's paper.


       When D and E are T.I. sets, as in the hypothesis of the theorem, one can fairly
easily conclude from the lemma that D is conjugate to E in B: Use the isomorphism in the
lemma to make B and Bf into G x D modules. The lemma implies that Bf is isomorphic to
Be^, a twist of Be by some automorphism ¡3 of D. To prove D is conjugate to E, it is




                                             260
                    DEFECT GROUPS AND THE ISOMORPHISM PROBLEM




enough to show B is isomorphic to BB However, these modules have the same character
on G x D , and they differ from the isomorphic modules Bf and B e ^ b y projectives, which are
determined by their characters.            This proves the desired isomorphism, and thus D is
conjugate to E in B.
        To prove the theorem, then, one just needs to verify the trivial source hypothesis of
the lemma. That is, one needs to check that B is a permutation module for D x E . Using
Weiss's results [W], it suffices to check that B/BI(SE) is a permutation module for SD,
where I(SE) is the augmentation ideal of SE.                Thus, it suffices to check that each
nonprojective indecomposable component M of B/BI(SE) has trivial source as an
SG—module. Certainly M has trivial source and vertex E as an SH—module, since it is a
nonprojective indecomposable direct summand of SH/SH-I(SE) 2 SH/E.                 If S contains
sufficient p'—roots of unity, which we may assume, the indecomposable S—free trivial
source modules with vertex E for the normalizer N J J ( E ) are just obtained from evident
rank 1 actions of N J J ( E ) / C J J ( E ) ,   and their reductions modulo p are the simple
NJJ(E)—modules over the residue field.              All these indécomposables may be viewed as
syzygies of certain degrees of the trivial module. Since E is cyclic and a T.I. set, it is easy
to see, from Green's results on walking around the Brauer tree [G], that their Green
correspondents, such as M, are the corresponding syzygies of the trivial module for SH.
Conversely, every syzygy of the trivial module of appropriate degree (even, unless E has
order 2) has trivial source. Note at this point the case where E has order 2 is trivial, since
it implies H has a normal 2—complement, and consequently B has rank 2 as an S—module.
Hence we may assume E has order greater tham 2, and, similarly, that D has order greater
than 2.     Next, modifying the augmentation of SH, if necessary (without disturbing its
restriction to SE), we may assume the augmentation B -» S induced by SG -» S agrees with
that induced by SH -» S. Thus "syzygy of the trivial module" of any given degree now has




                                                      261
                                       L.L.   SCOTT




the same meaning with respect to SG as SH, and so M also has trivial source as an
SG-module. Q.E.D.
       In closing let me thank Puig and his students for their early and continuing interest
in the theorem and the defect group conjugacy question.        From Puig's point of view, a
source algebra is an S—algebra equipped with an embedding of a defect group (or, more
precisely, a conjugacy class of such embeddings), and a block might be regarded similarly.
The question that we are raising here is the extent to which such an embedding is
essentially determined by the S—algebra. The above results show this is true at least in
some significant cases.
                            Late note: Results of H. Blau, using the classification,
                            make the "T.I. set" assumption in our Theorem
                            unnecessary. Details will appear elsewhere, with a
                            version for source algebras (of principal blocks).
References
[C]    D. B. Coleman, On the modular group ring of a p—group, Proc. AMS. 15 (1964),
       511-514.
[G]    J. A. Green, Walking around the Brauer tree, J. Austral. Math. Soc. 17, 197—213
[P]    L. Puig, Pointed groups and construction of characters, Math. Z. 176 (1981),
       265-292.

[R]    G. Robinson, The Zp — theorem and units in blocks, preprint.

[Ro]   K. Roggenkamp, Integral representations and structure of finite group rings, Les
       Presses de l'Université de Monreal, Séminaire de Mathématiques Supérieures, 1980.
[RS]   K. Roggenkamp and L. Scott, Isomorphisms of p—adic group rings, Annals of Math.
       126 (1987), 593-647.
[S]    L. Scott, Recent progress on the isomorphism problem, Proceedings of Symposia in
       Pure Mathematics 47 (1987), 259-273.
[Wa]   H. N. Ward, Some results on the group algebra of a group over a prime field, Mimeo
       Notes, Harvard Univ. 1960-61.
[W]    A. Weiss, Rigidity of p-adic p-torsion, Annals of Math. 127 (1988), 317-332.

                                                    The University of Viginia
                                                    Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA




                                              262
